Loomings.
Call me Ishmael.
Some years ago--never mind how longprecisely--having little or no money in my purse, and nothingparticular to interest me on shore, I thought I would sail about alittle and see the watery part of the world.
It is a way I have ofdriving off the spleen and regulating the circulation.
Whenever Ifind myself growing grim about the mouth; whenever it is a damp,drizzly November in my soul; whenever I find myself involuntarilypausing before coffin warehouses, and bringing up the rear of everyfuneral I meet; and especially whenever my hypos get such an upperhand of me, that it requires a strong moral principle to prevent mefrom deliberately stepping into the street, and methodically knockingpeople's hats off--then, I account it high time to get to sea as soonas I can.
This is my substitute for pistol and ball.
With aphilosophical flourish Cato throws himself upon his sword; I quietlytake to the ship.
There is nothing surprising in this.
If they butknew it, almost all men in their degree, some time or other, cherishvery nearly the same feelings towards the ocean with me.
There now is your insular city of the Manhattoes, belted round bywharves as Indian isles by coral reefs--commerce surrounds it withher surf.
Right and left, the streets take you waterward.
Itsextreme downtown is the battery, where that noble mole is washed bywaves, and cooled by breezes, which a few hours previous were out ofsight of land.
Look at the crowds of water-gazers there.
Circumambulate the city of a dreamy Sabbath afternoon.
Go fromCorlears Hook to Coenties Slip, and from thence, by Whitehall,northward.
What do you see?--Posted like silent sentinels all aroundthe town, stand thousands upon thousands of mortal men fixed in oceanreveries.
Some leaning against the spiles; some seated upon thepier-heads; some looking over the bulwarks of ships from China; somehigh aloft in the rigging, as if striving to get a still betterseaward peep.
But these are all landsmen; of week days pent up inlath and plaster--tied to counters, nailed to benches, clinched todesks.
How then is this? Are the green fields gone? What do theyhere?But look! here come more crowds, pacing straight for the water, andseemingly bound for a dive.
Strange! Nothing will content them butthe extremest limit of the land; loitering under the shady lee ofyonder warehouses will not suffice.
No.
They must get just as nighthe water as they possibly can without falling in.
And there theystand--miles of them--leagues.
Inlanders all, they come from lanesand alleys, streets and avenues--north, east, south, and west.
Yethere they all unite.
Tell me, does the magnetic virtue of theneedles of the compasses of all those ships attract them thither?Once more.
Say you are in the country; in some high land of lakes.
Take almost any path you please, and ten to one it carries you downin a dale, and leaves you there by a pool in the stream.
There ismagic in it.
Let the most absent-minded of men be plunged in hisdeepest reveries--stand that man on his legs, set his feet a-going,and he will infallibly lead you to water, if water there be in allthat region.
Should you ever be athirst in the great Americandesert, try this experiment, if your caravan happen to be suppliedwith a metaphysical professor.
Yes, as every one knows, meditationand water are wedded for ever.
But here is an artist.
He desires to paint you the dreamiest,shadiest, quietest, most enchanting bit of romantic landscape in allthe valley of the Saco.
What is the chief element he employs? Therestand his trees, each with a hollow trunk, as if a hermit and acrucifix were within; and here sleeps his meadow, and there sleep hiscattle; and up from yonder cottage goes a sleepy smoke.
Deep intodistant woodlands winds a mazy way, reaching to overlapping spurs ofmountains bathed in their hill-side blue.
But though the picturelies thus tranced, and though this pine-tree shakes down its sighslike leaves upon this shepherd's head, yet all were vain, unless theshepherd's eye were fixed upon the magic stream before him.
Go visitthe Prairies in June, when for scores on scores of miles you wadeknee-deep among Tiger-lilies--what is the one charmwanting?--Water--there is not a drop of water there! Were Niagarabut a cataract of sand, would you travel your thousand miles to seeit? Why did the poor poet of Tennessee, upon suddenly receiving twohandfuls of silver, deliberate whether to buy him a coat, which hesadly needed, or invest his money in a pedestrian trip to RockawayBeach? Why is almost every robust healthy boy with a robust healthysoul in him, at some time or other crazy to go to sea? Why upon yourfirst voyage as a passenger, did you yourself feel such a mysticalvibration, when first told that you and your ship were now out ofsight of land? Why did the old Persians hold the sea holy? Why didthe Greeks give it a separate deity, and own brother of Jove? Surelyall this is not without meaning.
And still deeper the meaning ofthat story of Narcissus, who because he could not grasp thetormenting, mild image he saw in the fountain, plunged into it andwas drowned.
But that same image, we ourselves see in all rivers andoceans.
It is the image of the ungraspable phantom of life; and thisis the key to it all.
Now, when I say that I am in the habit of going to sea whenever Ibegin to grow hazy about the eyes, and begin to be over conscious ofmy lungs, I do not mean to have it inferred that I ever go to sea asa passenger.
For to go as a passenger you must needs have a purse,and a purse is but a rag unless you have something in it.
Besides,passengers get sea-sick--grow quarrelsome--don't sleep of nights--donot enjoy themselves much, as a general thing;--no, I never go as apassenger; nor, though I am something of a salt, do I ever go to seaas a Commodore, or a Captain, or a Cook.
I abandon the glory anddistinction of such offices to those who like them.
For my part, Iabominate all honourable respectable toils, trials, and tribulationsof every kind whatsoever.
It is quite as much as I can do to takecare of myself, without taking care of ships, barques, brigs,schooners, and what not.
And as for going as cook,--though I confessthere is considerable glory in that, a cook being a sort of officeron ship-board--yet, somehow, I never fancied broiling fowls;--thoughonce broiled, judiciously buttered, and judgmatically salted andpeppered, there is no one who will speak more respectfully, not tosay reverentially, of a broiled fowl than I will.
It is out of theidolatrous dotings of the old Egyptians upon broiled ibis and roastedriver horse, that you see the mummies of those creatures in theirhuge bake-houses the pyramids.
No, when I go to sea, I go as a simple sailor, right before the mast,plumb down into the forecastle, aloft there to the royal mast-head.
True, they rather order me about some, and make me jump from spar tospar, like a grasshopper in a May meadow.
And at first, this sort ofthing is unpleasant enough.
It touches one's sense of honour,particularly if you come of an old established family in the land,the Van Rensselaers, or Randolphs, or Hardicanutes.
And more thanall, if just previous to putting your hand into the tar-pot, you havebeen lording it as a country schoolmaster, making the tallest boysstand in awe of you.
The transition is a keen one, I assure you,from a schoolmaster to a sailor, and requires a strong decoction ofSeneca and the Stoics to enable you to grin and bear it.
But eventhis wears off in time.
What of it, if some old hunks of a sea-captain orders me to get abroom and sweep down the decks? What does that indignity amount to,weighed, I mean, in the scales of the New Testament? Do you thinkthe archangel Gabriel thinks anything the less of me, because Ipromptly and respectfully obey that old hunks in that particularinstance? Who ain't a slave? Tell me that.
Well, then, however theold sea-captains may order me about--however they may thump and punchme about, I have the satisfaction of knowing that it is all right;that everybody else is one way or other served in much the sameway--either in a physical or metaphysical point of view, that is; andso the universal thump is passed round, and all hands should rub eachother's shoulder-blades, and be content.
Again, I always go to sea as a sailor, because they make a point ofpaying me for my trouble, whereas they never pay passengers a singlepenny that I ever heard of.
On the contrary, passengers themselvesmust pay.
And there is all the difference in the world betweenpaying and being paid.
The act of paying is perhaps the mostuncomfortable infliction that the two orchard thieves entailed uponus.
But BEING PAID,--what will compare with it? The urbane activitywith which a man receives money is really marvellous, consideringthat we so earnestly believe money to be the root of all earthlyills, and that on no account can a monied man enter heaven.
Ah! howcheerfully we consign ourselves to perdition!Finally, I always go to sea as a sailor, because of the wholesomeexercise and pure air of the fore-castle deck.
For as in this world,head winds are far more prevalent than winds from astern (that is, ifyou never violate the Pythagorean maxim), so for the most part theCommodore on the quarter-deck gets his atmosphere at second hand fromthe sailors on the forecastle.
He thinks he breathes it first; butnot so.
In much the same way do the commonalty lead their leaders inmany other things, at the same time that the leaders little suspectit.
But wherefore it was that after having repeatedly smelt the seaas a merchant sailor, I should now take it into my head to go on awhaling voyage; this the invisible police officer of the Fates, whohas the constant surveillance of me, and secretly dogs me, andinfluences me in some unaccountable way--he can better answer thanany one else.
And, doubtless, my going on this whaling voyage,formed part of the grand programme of Providence that was drawn up along time ago.
It came in as a sort of brief interlude and solobetween more extensive performances.
I take it that this part of thebill must have run something like this:"GRAND CONTESTED ELECTION FOR THE PRESIDENCY OF THE UNITED STATES.
"WHALING VOYAGE BY ONE ISHMAEL.
"BLOODY BATTLE IN AFFGHANISTAN.
"Though I cannot tell why it was exactly that those stage managers,the Fates, put me down for this shabby part of a whaling voyage, whenothers were set down for magnificent parts in high tragedies, andshort and easy parts in genteel comedies, and jolly parts infarces--though I cannot tell why this was exactly; yet, now that Irecall all the circumstances, I think I can see a little into thesprings and motives which being cunningly presented to me undervarious disguises, induced me to set about performing the part I did,besides cajoling me into the delusion that it was a choice resultingfrom my own unbiased freewill and discriminating judgment.
Chief among these motives was the overwhelming idea of the greatwhale himself.
Such a portentous and mysterious monster roused allmy curiosity.
Then the wild and distant seas where he rolled hisisland bulk; the undeliverable, nameless perils of the whale; these,with all the attending marvels of a thousand Patagonian sights andsounds, helped to sway me to my wish.
With other men, perhaps, suchthings would not have been inducements; but as for me, I am tormentedwith an everlasting itch for things remote.
I love to sail forbiddenseas, and land on barbarous coasts.
Not ignoring what is good, I amquick to perceive a horror, and could still be social with it--wouldthey let me--since it is but well to be on friendly terms with allthe inmates of the place one lodges in.
By reason of these things, then, the whaling voyage was welcome; thegreat flood-gates of the wonder-world swung open, and in the wildconceits that swayed me to my purpose, two and two there floated intomy inmost soul, endless processions of the whale, and, mid most ofthem all, one grand hooded phantom, like a snow hill in the air.
The Carpet-Bag.
I stuffed a shirt or two into my old carpet-bag, tucked it under myarm, and started for Cape Horn and the Pacific.
Quitting the goodcity of old Manhatto, I duly arrived in New Bedford.
It was aSaturday night in December.
Much was I disappointed upon learningthat the little packet for Nantucket had already sailed, and that noway of reaching that place would offer, till the following Monday.
As most young candidates for the pains and penalties of whaling stopat this same New Bedford, thence to embark on their voyage, it may aswell be related that I, for one, had no idea of so doing.
For mymind was made up to sail in no other than a Nantucket craft, becausethere was a fine, boisterous something about everything connectedwith that famous old island, which amazingly pleased me.
Besidesthough New Bedford has of late been gradually monopolising thebusiness of whaling, and though in this matter poor old Nantucket isnow much behind her, yet Nantucket was her great original--the Tyreof this Carthage;--the place where the first dead American whale wasstranded.
Where else but from Nantucket did those aboriginalwhalemen, the Red-Men, first sally out in canoes to give chase to theLeviathan? And where but from Nantucket, too, did that firstadventurous little sloop put forth, partly laden with importedcobblestones--so goes the story--to throw at the whales, in order todiscover when they were nigh enough to risk a harpoon from thebowsprit?Now having a night, a day, and still another night following beforeme in New Bedford, ere I could embark for my destined port, itbecame a matter of concernment where I was to eat and sleepmeanwhile.
It was a very dubious-looking, nay, a very dark anddismal night, bitingly cold and cheerless.
I knew no one in theplace.
With anxious grapnels I had sounded my pocket, and onlybrought up a few pieces of silver,--So, wherever you go, Ishmael,said I to myself, as I stood in the middle of a dreary streetshouldering my bag, and comparing the gloom towards the north withthe darkness towards the south--wherever in your wisdom you mayconclude to lodge for the night, my dear Ishmael, be sure to inquirethe price, and don't be too particular.
With halting steps I paced the streets, and passed the sign of "TheCrossed Harpoons"--but it looked too expensive and jolly there.
Further on, from the bright red windows of the "Sword-Fish Inn,"there came such fervent rays, that it seemed to have melted thepacked snow and ice from before the house, for everywhere else thecongealed frost lay ten inches thick in a hard, asphalticpavement,--rather weary for me, when I struck my foot against theflinty projections, because from hard, remorseless service the solesof my boots were in a most miserable plight.
Too expensive andjolly, again thought I, pausing one moment to watch the broad glarein the street, and hear the sounds of the tinkling glasses within.
But go on, Ishmael, said I at last; don't you hear? get away frombefore the door; your patched boots are stopping the way.
So on Iwent.
I now by instinct followed the streets that took me waterward,for there, doubtless, were the cheapest, if not the cheeriest inns.
Such dreary streets! blocks of blackness, not houses, on eitherhand, and here and there a candle, like a candle moving about in atomb.
At this hour of the night, of the last day of the week, thatquarter of the town proved all but deserted.
But presently I came toa smoky light proceeding from a low, wide building, the door of whichstood invitingly open.
It had a careless look, as if it were meantfor the uses of the public; so, entering, the first thing I did wasto stumble over an ash-box in the porch.
Ha! thought I, ha, as theflying particles almost choked me, are these ashes from thatdestroyed city, Gomorrah? But "The Crossed Harpoons," and "TheSword-Fish?"--this, then must needs be the sign of "The Trap.
"However, I picked myself up and hearing a loud voice within, pushedon and opened a second, interior door.
It seemed the great Black Parliament sitting in Tophet.
A hundredblack faces turned round in their rows to peer; and beyond, a blackAngel of Doom was beating a book in a pulpit.
It was a negro church;and the preacher's text was about the blackness of darkness, and theweeping and wailing and teeth-gnashing there.
Ha, Ishmael, mutteredI, backing out, Wretched entertainment at the sign of 'The Trap!'Moving on, I at last came to a dim sort of light not far from thedocks, and heard a forlorn creaking in the air; and looking up, saw aswinging sign over the door with a white painting upon it, faintlyrepresenting a tall straight jet of misty spray, and these wordsunderneath--"The Spouter Inn:--Peter Coffin.
"Coffin?--Spouter?--Rather ominous in that particular connexion,thought I.
But it is a common name in Nantucket, they say, and Isuppose this Peter here is an emigrant from there.
As the lightlooked so dim, and the place, for the time, looked quiet enough, andthe dilapidated little wooden house itself looked as if it might havebeen carted here from the ruins of some burnt district, and as theswinging sign had a poverty-stricken sort of creak to it, I thoughtthat here was the very spot for cheap lodgings, and the best of peacoffee.
It was a queer sort of place--a gable-ended old house, one sidepalsied as it were, and leaning over sadly.
It stood on a sharpbleak corner, where that tempestuous wind Euroclydon kept up a worsehowling than ever it did about poor Paul's tossed craft.
Euroclydon,nevertheless, is a mighty pleasant zephyr to any one in-doors, withhis feet on the hob quietly toasting for bed.
"In judging of thattempestuous wind called Euroclydon," says an old writer--of whoseworks I possess the only copy extant--"it maketh a marvellousdifference, whether thou lookest out at it from a glass window wherethe frost is all on the outside, or whether thou observest it fromthat sashless window, where the frost is on both sides, and of whichthe wight Death is the only glazier.
" True enough, thought I, asthis passage occurred to my mind--old black-letter, thou reasonestwell.
Yes, these eyes are windows, and this body of mine is thehouse.
What a pity they didn't stop up the chinks and the cranniesthough, and thrust in a little lint here and there.
But it's toolate to make any improvements now.
The universe is finished; thecopestone is on, and the chips were carted off a million years ago.
Poor Lazarus there, chattering his teeth against the curbstone forhis pillow, and shaking off his tatters with his shiverings, he mightplug up both ears with rags, and put a corn-cob into his mouth, andyet that would not keep out the tempestuous Euroclydon.
Euroclydon!says old Dives, in his red silken wrapper--(he had a redder oneafterwards) pooh, pooh! What a fine frosty night; how Orionglitters; what northern lights! Let them talk of their orientalsummer climes of everlasting conservatories; give me the privilege ofmaking my own summer with my own coals.
But what thinks Lazarus? Can he warm his blue hands by holding themup to the grand northern lights? Would not Lazarus rather be inSumatra than here? Would he not far rather lay him down lengthwisealong the line of the equator; yea, ye gods! go down to the fiery pititself, in order to keep out this frost?Now, that Lazarus should lie stranded there on the curbstone beforethe door of Dives, this is more wonderful than that an iceberg shouldbe moored to one of the Moluccas.
Yet Dives himself, he too liveslike a Czar in an ice palace made of frozen sighs, and being apresident of a temperance society, he only drinks the tepid tears oforphans.
But no more of this blubbering now, we are going a-whaling, and thereis plenty of that yet to come.
Let us scrape the ice from ourfrosted feet, and see what sort of a place this "Spouter" may be.
The Spouter-Inn.
Entering that gable-ended Spouter-Inn, you found yourself in a wide,low, straggling entry with old-fashioned wainscots, reminding one ofthe bulwarks of some condemned old craft.
On one side hung a verylarge oilpainting so thoroughly besmoked, and every way defaced,that in the unequal crosslights by which you viewed it, it was onlyby diligent study and a series of systematic visits to it, andcareful inquiry of the neighbors, that you could any way arrive at anunderstanding of its purpose.
Such unaccountable masses of shadesand shadows, that at first you almost thought some ambitious youngartist, in the time of the New England hags, had endeavored todelineate chaos bewitched.
But by dint of much and earnestcontemplation, and oft repeated ponderings, and especially bythrowing open the little window towards the back of the entry, you atlast come to the conclusion that such an idea, however wild, mightnot be altogether unwarranted.
But what most puzzled and confounded you was a long, limber,portentous, black mass of something hovering in the centre of thepicture over three blue, dim, perpendicular lines floating in anameless yeast.
A boggy, soggy, squitchy picture truly, enough todrive a nervous man distracted.
Yet was there a sort of indefinite,half-attained, unimaginable sublimity about it that fairly froze youto it, till you involuntarily took an oath with yourself to find outwhat that marvellous painting meant.
Ever and anon a bright, but,alas, deceptive idea would dart you through.
--It's the Black Sea in amidnight gale.
--It's the unnatural combat of the four primalelements.
--It's a blasted heath.
--It's a Hyperborean winterscene.
--It's the breaking-up of the icebound stream of Time.
But atlast all these fancies yielded to that one portentous something inthe picture's midst.
THAT once found out, and all the rest wereplain.
But stop; does it not bear a faint resemblance to a giganticfish? even the great leviathan himself?In fact, the artist's design seemed this: a final theory of my own,partly based upon the aggregated opinions of many aged persons withwhom I conversed upon the subject.
The picture represents aCape-Horner in a great hurricane; the half-foundered ship welteringthere with its three dismantled masts alone visible; and anexasperated whale, purposing to spring clean over the craft, is inthe enormous act of impaling himself upon the three mast-heads.
The opposite wall of this entry was hung all over with a heathenisharray of monstrous clubs and spears.
Some were thickly set withglittering teeth resembling ivory saws; others were tufted with knotsof human hair; and one was sickle-shaped, with a vast handle sweepinground like the segment made in the new-mown grass by a long-armedmower.
You shuddered as you gazed, and wondered what monstrouscannibal and savage could ever have gone a death-harvesting with sucha hacking, horrifying implement.
Mixed with these were rusty oldwhaling lances and harpoons all broken and deformed.
Some werestoried weapons.
With this once long lance, now wildly elbowed,fifty years ago did Nathan Swain kill fifteen whales between asunrise and a sunset.
And that harpoon--so like a corkscrew now--wasflung in Javan seas, and run away with by a whale, years afterwardsslain off the Cape of Blanco.
The original iron entered nigh thetail, and, like a restless needle sojourning in the body of a man,travelled full forty feet, and at last was found imbedded in thehump.
Crossing this dusky entry, and on through yon low-arched way--cutthrough what in old times must have been a great central chimney withfireplaces all round--you enter the public room.
A still duskierplace is this, with such low ponderous beams above, and such oldwrinkled planks beneath, that you would almost fancy you trod someold craft's cockpits, especially of such a howling night, when thiscorner-anchored old ark rocked so furiously.
On one side stood along, low, shelf-like table covered with cracked glass cases, filledwith dusty rarities gathered from this wide world's remotest nooks.
Projecting from the further angle of the room stands a dark-lookingden--the bar--a rude attempt at a right whale's head.
Be that how itmay, there stands the vast arched bone of the whale's jaw, so wide, acoach might almost drive beneath it.
Within are shabby shelves,ranged round with old decanters, bottles, flasks; and in those jawsof swift destruction, like another cursed Jonah (by which name indeedthey called him), bustles a little withered old man, who, for theirmoney, dearly sells the sailors deliriums and death.
Abominable are the tumblers into which he pours his poison.
Thoughtrue cylinders without--within, the villanous green goggling glassesdeceitfully tapered downwards to a cheating bottom.
Parallelmeridians rudely pecked into the glass, surround these footpads'goblets.
Fill to THIS mark, and your charge is but a penny; to THISa penny more; and so on to the full glass--the Cape Horn measure,which you may gulp down for a shilling.
Upon entering the place I found a number of young seamen gatheredabout a table, examining by a dim light divers specimens ofSKRIMSHANDER.
I sought the landlord, and telling him I desired to beaccommodated with a room, received for answer that his house wasfull--not a bed unoccupied.
"But avast," he added, tapping hisforehead, "you haint no objections to sharing a harpooneer's blanket,have ye? I s'pose you are goin' a-whalin', so you'd better get usedto that sort of thing.
"I told him that I never liked to sleep two in a bed; that if I shouldever do so, it would depend upon who the harpooneer might be, andthat if he (the landlord) really had no other place for me, and theharpooneer was not decidedly objectionable, why rather than wanderfurther about a strange town on so bitter a night, I would put upwith the half of any decent man's blanket.
"I thought so.
All right; take a seat.
Supper?--you want supper?Supper'll be ready directly.
"I sat down on an old wooden settle, carved all over like a bench onthe Battery.
At one end a ruminating tar was still further adorningit with his jack-knife, stooping over and diligently working away atthe space between his legs.
He was trying his hand at a ship underfull sail, but he didn't make much headway, I thought.
At last some four or five of us were summoned to our meal in anadjoining room.
It was cold as Iceland--no fire at all--the landlordsaid he couldn't afford it.
Nothing but two dismal tallow candles,each in a winding sheet.
We were fain to button up our monkeyjackets, and hold to our lips cups of scalding tea with our halffrozen fingers.
But the fare was of the most substantial kind--notonly meat and potatoes, but dumplings; good heavens! dumplings forsupper! One young fellow in a green box coat, addressed himself tothese dumplings in a most direful manner.
"My boy," said the landlord, "you'll have the nightmare to a deadsartainty.
""Landlord," I whispered, "that aint the harpooneer is it?""Oh, no," said he, looking a sort of diabolically funny, "theharpooneer is a dark complexioned chap.
He never eats dumplings, hedon't--he eats nothing but steaks, and he likes 'em rare.
""The devil he does," says I.
"Where is that harpooneer? Is hehere?""He'll be here afore long," was the answer.
I could not help it, but I began to feel suspicious of this "darkcomplexioned" harpooneer.
At any rate, I made up my mind that if itso turned out that we should sleep together, he must undress and getinto bed before I did.
Supper over, the company went back to the bar-room, when, knowing notwhat else to do with myself, I resolved to spend the rest of theevening as a looker on.
Presently a rioting noise was heard without.
Starting up, thelandlord cried, "That's the Grampus's crew.
I seed her reported inthe offing this morning; a three years' voyage, and a full ship.
Hurrah, boys; now we'll have the latest news from the Feegees.
"A tramping of sea boots was heard in the entry; the door was flungopen, and in rolled a wild set of mariners enough.
Enveloped intheir shaggy watch coats, and with their heads muffled in woollencomforters, all bedarned and ragged, and their beards stiff withicicles, they seemed an eruption of bears from Labrador.
They hadjust landed from their boat, and this was the first house theyentered.
No wonder, then, that they made a straight wake for thewhale's mouth--the bar--when the wrinkled little old Jonah, thereofficiating, soon poured them out brimmers all round.
One complainedof a bad cold in his head, upon which Jonah mixed him a pitch-likepotion of gin and molasses, which he swore was a sovereign cure forall colds and catarrhs whatsoever, never mind of how long standing,or whether caught off the coast of Labrador, or on the weather sideof an ice-island.
The liquor soon mounted into their heads, as it generally does evenwith the arrantest topers newly landed from sea, and they begancapering about most obstreperously.
I observed, however, that one of them held somewhat aloof, and thoughhe seemed desirous not to spoil the hilarity of his shipmates by hisown sober face, yet upon the whole he refrained from making as muchnoise as the rest.
This man interested me at once; and since thesea-gods had ordained that he should soon become my shipmate (thoughbut a sleeping-partner one, so far as this narrative is concerned),I will here venture upon a little description of him.
He stood fullsix feet in height, with noble shoulders, and a chest like acoffer-dam.
I have seldom seen such brawn in a man.
His face wasdeeply brown and burnt, making his white teeth dazzling by thecontrast; while in the deep shadows of his eyes floated somereminiscences that did not seem to give him much joy.
His voice atonce announced that he was a Southerner, and from his fine stature, Ithought he must be one of those tall mountaineers from theAlleghanian Ridge in Virginia.
When the revelry of his companionshad mounted to its height, this man slipped away unobserved, and Isaw no more of him till he became my comrade on the sea.
In a fewminutes, however, he was missed by his shipmates, and being, itseems, for some reason a huge favourite with them, they raised a cryof "Bulkington! Bulkington! where's Bulkington?" and darted out ofthe house in pursuit of him.
It was now about nine o'clock, and the room seeming almostsupernaturally quiet after these orgies, I began to congratulatemyself upon a little plan that had occurred to me just previous tothe entrance of the seamen.
No man prefers to sleep two in a bed.
In fact, you would a good dealrather not sleep with your own brother.
I don't know how it is, butpeople like to be private when they are sleeping.
And when it comesto sleeping with an unknown stranger, in a strange inn, in a strangetown, and that stranger a harpooneer, then your objectionsindefinitely multiply.
Nor was there any earthly reason why I as asailor should sleep two in a bed, more than anybody else; for sailorsno more sleep two in a bed at sea, than bachelor Kings do ashore.
Tobe sure they all sleep together in one apartment, but you have yourown hammock, and cover yourself with your own blanket, and sleep inyour own skin.
The more I pondered over this harpooneer, the more I abominated thethought of sleeping with him.
It was fair to presume that being aharpooneer, his linen or woollen, as the case might be, would not beof the tidiest, certainly none of the finest.
I began to twitch allover.
Besides, it was getting late, and my decent harpooneer oughtto be home and going bedwards.
Suppose now, he should tumble in uponme at midnight--how could I tell from what vile hole he had beencoming?"Landlord! I've changed my mind about that harpooneer.
--I shan'tsleep with him.
I'll try the bench here.
""Just as you please; I'm sorry I cant spare ye a tablecloth for amattress, and it's a plaguy rough board here"--feeling of the knotsand notches.
"But wait a bit, Skrimshander; I've got a carpenter'splane there in the bar--wait, I say, and I'll make ye snug enough.
"So saying he procured the plane; and with his old silk handkerchieffirst dusting the bench, vigorously set to planing away at my bed,the while grinning like an ape.
The shavings flew right and left;till at last the plane-iron came bump against an indestructible knot.
The landlord was near spraining his wrist, and I told him forheaven's sake to quit--the bed was soft enough to suit me, and I didnot know how all the planing in the world could make eider down of apine plank.
So gathering up the shavings with another grin, andthrowing them into the great stove in the middle of the room, he wentabout his business, and left me in a brown study.
I now took the measure of the bench, and found that it was a foot tooshort; but that could be mended with a chair.
But it was a foot toonarrow, and the other bench in the room was about four inches higherthan the planed one--so there was no yoking them.
I then placed thefirst bench lengthwise along the only clear space against the wall,leaving a little interval between, for my back to settle down in.
But I soon found that there came such a draught of cold air over mefrom under the sill of the window, that this plan would never do atall, especially as another current from the rickety door met the onefrom the window, and both together formed a series of smallwhirlwinds in the immediate vicinity of the spot where I had thoughtto spend the night.
The devil fetch that harpooneer, thought I, but stop, couldn't Isteal a march on him--bolt his door inside, and jump into his bed,not to be wakened by the most violent knockings? It seemed no badidea; but upon second thoughts I dismissed it.
For who could tellbut what the next morning, so soon as I popped out of the room, theharpooneer might be standing in the entry, all ready to knock medown!Still, looking round me again, and seeing no possible chance ofspending a sufferable night unless in some other person's bed, Ibegan to think that after all I might be cherishing unwarrantableprejudices against this unknown harpooneer.
Thinks I, I'll waitawhile; he must be dropping in before long.
I'll have a good look athim then, and perhaps we may become jolly good bedfellows afterall--there's no telling.
But though the other boarders kept coming in by ones, twos, andthrees, and going to bed, yet no sign of my harpooneer.
"Landlord! said I, "what sort of a chap is he--does he always keepsuch late hours?" It was now hard upon twelve o'clock.
The landlord chuckled again with his lean chuckle, and seemed to bemightily tickled at something beyond my comprehension.
"No," heanswered, "generally he's an early bird--airley to bed and airley torise--yes, he's the bird what catches the worm.
But to-night hewent out a peddling, you see, and I don't see what on airth keeps himso late, unless, may be, he can't sell his head.
""Can't sell his head?--What sort of a bamboozingly story is this youare telling me?" getting into a towering rage.
"Do you pretend tosay, landlord, that this harpooneer is actually engaged this blessedSaturday night, or rather Sunday morning, in peddling his head aroundthis town?""That's precisely it," said the landlord, "and I told him he couldn'tsell it here, the market's overstocked.
""With what?" shouted I.
"With heads to be sure; ain't there too many heads in the world?""I tell you what it is, landlord," said I quite calmly, "you'd betterstop spinning that yarn to me--I'm not green.
""May be not," taking out a stick and whittling a toothpick, "but Irayther guess you'll be done BROWN if that ere harpooneer hears you aslanderin' his head.
""I'll break it for him," said I, now flying into a passion again atthis unaccountable farrago of the landlord's.
"It's broke a'ready," said he.
"Broke," said I--"BROKE, do you mean?""Sartain, and that's the very reason he can't sell it, I guess.
""Landlord," said I, going up to him as cool as Mt.
Hecla in asnow-storm--"landlord, stop whittling.
You and I must understand oneanother, and that too without delay.
I come to your house and want abed; you tell me you can only give me half a one; that the other halfbelongs to a certain harpooneer.
And about this harpooneer, whom Ihave not yet seen, you persist in telling me the most mystifying andexasperating stories tending to beget in me an uncomfortable feelingtowards the man whom you design for my bedfellow--a sort ofconnexion, landlord, which is an intimate and confidential one in thehighest degree.
I now demand of you to speak out and tell me who andwhat this harpooneer is, and whether I shall be in all respects safeto spend the night with him.
And in the first place, you will be sogood as to unsay that story about selling his head, which if true Itake to be good evidence that this harpooneer is stark mad, and I'veno idea of sleeping with a madman; and you, sir, YOU I mean,landlord, YOU, sir, by trying to induce me to do so knowingly, wouldthereby render yourself liable to a criminal prosecution.
""Wall," said the landlord, fetching a long breath, "that's a purtylong sarmon for a chap that rips a little now and then.
But be easy,be easy, this here harpooneer I have been tellin' you of has justarrived from the south seas, where he bought up a lot of 'balmed NewZealand heads (great curios, you know), and he's sold all on 'em butone, and that one he's trying to sell to-night, cause to-morrow'sSunday, and it would not do to be sellin' human heads about thestreets when folks is goin' to churches.
He wanted to, last Sunday,but I stopped him just as he was goin' out of the door with fourheads strung on a string, for all the airth like a string of inions.
"This account cleared up the otherwise unaccountable mystery, andshowed that the landlord, after all, had had no idea of foolingme--but at the same time what could I think of a harpooneer whostayed out of a Saturday night clean into the holy Sabbath, engagedin such a cannibal business as selling the heads of dead idolators?"Depend upon it, landlord, that harpooneer is a dangerous man.
""He pays reg'lar," was the rejoinder.
"But come, it's gettingdreadful late, you had better be turning flukes--it's a nice bed;Sal and me slept in that ere bed the night we were spliced.
There'splenty of room for two to kick about in that bed; it's an almightybig bed that.
Why, afore we give it up, Sal used to put our Sam andlittle Johnny in the foot of it.
But I got a dreaming and sprawlingabout one night, and somehow, Sam got pitched on the floor, and camenear breaking his arm.
Arter that, Sal said it wouldn't do.
Comealong here, I'll give ye a glim in a jiffy;" and so saying he lighteda candle and held it towards me, offering to lead the way.
But Istood irresolute; when looking at a clock in the corner, he exclaimed"I vum it's Sunday--you won't see that harpooneer to-night; he's cometo anchor somewhere--come along then; DO come; WON'T ye come?"I considered the matter a moment, and then up stairs we went, and Iwas ushered into a small room, cold as a clam, and furnished, sureenough, with a prodigious bed, almost big enough indeed for any fourharpooneers to sleep abreast.
"There," said the landlord, placing the candle on a crazy old seachest that did double duty as a wash-stand and centre table; "there,make yourself comfortable now, and good night to ye.
" I turnedround from eyeing the bed, but he had disappeared.
Folding back the counterpane, I stooped over the bed.
Though none ofthe most elegant, it yet stood the scrutiny tolerably well.
I thenglanced round the room; and besides the bedstead and centre table,could see no other furniture belonging to the place, but a rudeshelf, the four walls, and a papered fireboard representing a manstriking a whale.
Of things not properly belonging to the room,there was a hammock lashed up, and thrown upon the floor in onecorner; also a large seaman's bag, containing the harpooneer'swardrobe, no doubt in lieu of a land trunk.
Likewise, there was aparcel of outlandish bone fish hooks on the shelf over thefire-place, and a tall harpoon standing at the head of the bed.
But what is this on the chest? I took it up, and held it close tothe light, and felt it, and smelt it, and tried every way possible toarrive at some satisfactory conclusion concerning it.
I can compareit to nothing but a large door mat, ornamented at the edges withlittle tinkling tags something like the stained porcupine quillsround an Indian moccasin.
There was a hole or slit in the middle ofthis mat, as you see the same in South American ponchos.
But couldit be possible that any sober harpooneer would get into a door mat,and parade the streets of any Christian town in that sort of guise?I put it on, to try it, and it weighed me down like a hamper, beinguncommonly shaggy and thick, and I thought a little damp, as thoughthis mysterious harpooneer had been wearing it of a rainy day.
Iwent up in it to a bit of glass stuck against the wall, and I neversaw such a sight in my life.
I tore myself out of it in such a hurrythat I gave myself a kink in the neck.
I sat down on the side of the bed, and commenced thinking about thishead-peddling harpooneer, and his door mat.
After thinking some timeon the bed-side, I got up and took off my monkey jacket, and thenstood in the middle of the room thinking.
I then took off my coat,and thought a little more in my shirt sleeves.
But beginning to feelvery cold now, half undressed as I was, and remembering what thelandlord said about the harpooneer's not coming home at all thatnight, it being so very late, I made no more ado, but jumped out ofmy pantaloons and boots, and then blowing out the light tumbled intobed, and commended myself to the care of heaven.
Whether that mattress was stuffed with corn-cobs or broken crockery,there is no telling, but I rolled about a good deal, and could notsleep for a long time.
At last I slid off into a light doze, and hadpretty nearly made a good offing towards the land of Nod, when Iheard a heavy footfall in the passage, and saw a glimmer of lightcome into the room from under the door.
Lord save me, thinks I, that must be the harpooneer, the infernalhead-peddler.
But I lay perfectly still, and resolved not to say aword till spoken to.
Holding a light in one hand, and that identicalNew Zealand head in the other, the stranger entered the room, andwithout looking towards the bed, placed his candle a good way offfrom me on the floor in one corner, and then began working away atthe knotted cords of the large bag I before spoke of as being in theroom.
I was all eagerness to see his face, but he kept it avertedfor some time while employed in unlacing the bag's mouth.
Thisaccomplished, however, he turned round--when, good heavens! what asight! Such a face! It was of a dark, purplish, yellow colour, hereand there stuck over with large blackish looking squares.
Yes, it'sjust as I thought, he's a terrible bedfellow; he's been in a fight,got dreadfully cut, and here he is, just from the surgeon.
But atthat moment he chanced to turn his face so towards the light, that Iplainly saw they could not be sticking-plasters at all, those blacksquares on his cheeks.
They were stains of some sort or other.
Atfirst I knew not what to make of this; but soon an inkling of thetruth occurred to me.
I remembered a story of a white man--awhaleman too--who, falling among the cannibals, had been tattooed bythem.
I concluded that this harpooneer, in the course of his distantvoyages, must have met with a similar adventure.
And what is it,thought I, after all! It's only his outside; a man can be honest inany sort of skin.
But then, what to make of his unearthlycomplexion, that part of it, I mean, lying round about, andcompletely independent of the squares of tattooing.
To be sure, itmight be nothing but a good coat of tropical tanning; but I neverheard of a hot sun's tanning a white man into a purplish yellow one.
However, I had never been in the South Seas; and perhaps the sunthere produced these extraordinary effects upon the skin.
Now, whileall these ideas were passing through me like lightning, thisharpooneer never noticed me at all.
But, after some difficultyhaving opened his bag, he commenced fumbling in it, and presentlypulled out a sort of tomahawk, and a seal-skin wallet with the hairon.
Placing these on the old chest in the middle of the room, hethen took the New Zealand head--a ghastly thing enough--and crammedit down into the bag.
He now took off his hat--a new beaverhat--when I came nigh singing out with fresh surprise.
There was nohair on his head--none to speak of at least--nothing but a smallscalp-knot twisted up on his forehead.
His bald purplish head nowlooked for all the world like a mildewed skull.
Had not the strangerstood between me and the door, I would have bolted out of it quickerthan ever I bolted a dinner.
Even as it was, I thought something of slipping out of the window,but it was the second floor back.
I am no coward, but what to makeof this head-peddling purple rascal altogether passed mycomprehension.
Ignorance is the parent of fear, and being completelynonplussed and confounded about the stranger, I confess I was now asmuch afraid of him as if it was the devil himself who had thus brokeninto my room at the dead of night.
In fact, I was so afraid of himthat I was not game enough just then to address him, and demand asatisfactory answer concerning what seemed inexplicable in him.
Meanwhile, he continued the business of undressing, and at lastshowed his chest and arms.
As I live, these covered parts of himwere checkered with the same squares as his face; his back, too, wasall over the same dark squares; he seemed to have been in a ThirtyYears' War, and just escaped from it with a sticking-plaster shirt.
Still more, his very legs were marked, as if a parcel of dark greenfrogs were running up the trunks of young palms.
It was now quiteplain that he must be some abominable savage or other shipped aboardof a whaleman in the South Seas, and so landed in this Christiancountry.
I quaked to think of it.
A peddler of heads too--perhapsthe heads of his own brothers.
He might take a fancy tomine--heavens! look at that tomahawk!But there was no time for shuddering, for now the savage went aboutsomething that completely fascinated my attention, and convinced methat he must indeed be a heathen.
Going to his heavy grego, orwrapall, or dreadnaught, which he had previously hung on a chair, hefumbled in the pockets, and produced at length a curious littledeformed image with a hunch on its back, and exactly the colour of athree days' old Congo baby.
Remembering the embalmed head, at firstI almost thought that this black manikin was a real baby preservedin some similar manner.
But seeing that it was not at all limber,and that it glistened a good deal like polished ebony, I concludedthat it must be nothing but a wooden idol, which indeed it proved tobe.
For now the savage goes up to the empty fire-place, and removingthe papered fire-board, sets up this little hunch-backed image, likea tenpin, between the andirons.
The chimney jambs and all the bricksinside were very sooty, so that I thought this fire-place made a veryappropriate little shrine or chapel for his Congo idol.
I now screwed my eyes hard towards the half hidden image, feeling butill at ease meantime--to see what was next to follow.
First he takesabout a double handful of shavings out of his grego pocket, andplaces them carefully before the idol; then laying a bit of shipbiscuit on top and applying the flame from the lamp, he kindled theshavings into a sacrificial blaze.
Presently, after many hastysnatches into the fire, and still hastier withdrawals of his fingers(whereby he seemed to be scorching them badly), he at last succeededin drawing out the biscuit; then blowing off the heat and ashes alittle, he made a polite offer of it to the little negro.
But thelittle devil did not seem to fancy such dry sort of fare at all; henever moved his lips.
All these strange antics were accompanied bystill stranger guttural noises from the devotee, who seemed to bepraying in a sing-song or else singing some pagan psalmody or other,during which his face twitched about in the most unnatural manner.
At last extinguishing the fire, he took the idol up veryunceremoniously, and bagged it again in his grego pocket ascarelessly as if he were a sportsman bagging a dead woodcock.
All these queer proceedings increased my uncomfortableness, andseeing him now exhibiting strong symptoms of concluding his businessoperations, and jumping into bed with me, I thought it was high time,now or never, before the light was put out, to break the spell inwhich I had so long been bound.
But the interval I spent in deliberating what to say, was a fatalone.
Taking up his tomahawk from the table, he examined the head ofit for an instant, and then holding it to the light, with his mouthat the handle, he puffed out great clouds of tobacco smoke.
The nextmoment the light was extinguished, and this wild cannibal, tomahawkbetween his teeth, sprang into bed with me.
I sang out, I could nothelp it now; and giving a sudden grunt of astonishment he beganfeeling me.
Stammering out something, I knew not what, I rolled away from himagainst the wall, and then conjured him, whoever or whatever he mightbe, to keep quiet, and let me get up and light the lamp again.
Buthis guttural responses satisfied me at once that he but illcomprehended my meaning.
"Who-e debel you?"--he at last said--"you no speak-e, dam-me, Ikill-e.
" And so saying the lighted tomahawk began flourishing aboutme in the dark.
"Landlord, for God's sake, Peter Coffin!" shouted I.
"Landlord!Watch! Coffin! Angels! save me!""Speak-e! tell-ee me who-ee be, or dam-me, I kill-e!" again growledthe cannibal, while his horrid flourishings of the tomahawk scatteredthe hot tobacco ashes about me till I thought my linen would get onfire.
But thank heaven, at that moment the landlord came into theroom light in hand, and leaping from the bed I ran up to him.
"Don't be afraid now," said he, grinning again, "Queequeg herewouldn't harm a hair of your head.
""Stop your grinning," shouted I, "and why didn't you tell me thatthat infernal harpooneer was a cannibal?""I thought ye know'd it;--didn't I tell ye, he was a peddlin' headsaround town?--but turn flukes again and go to sleep.
Queequeg, lookhere--you sabbee me, I sabbee--you this man sleepe you--you sabbee?""Me sabbee plenty"--grunted Queequeg, puffing away at his pipe andsitting up in bed.
"You gettee in," he added, motioning to me with his tomahawk, andthrowing the clothes to one side.
He really did this in not only acivil but a really kind and charitable way.
I stood looking at him amoment.
For all his tattooings he was on the whole a clean, comelylooking cannibal.
What's all this fuss I have been making about,thought I to myself--the man's a human being just as I am: he hasjust as much reason to fear me, as I have to be afraid of him.
Better sleep with a sober cannibal than a drunken Christian.
"Landlord," said I, "tell him to stash his tomahawk there, or pipe,or whatever you call it; tell him to stop smoking, in short, and Iwill turn in with him.
But I don't fancy having a man smoking in bedwith me.
It's dangerous.
Besides, I ain't insured.
"This being told to Queequeg, he at once complied, and again politelymotioned me to get into bed--rolling over to one side as much as tosay--I won't touch a leg of ye.
""Good night, landlord," said I, "you may go.
"I turned in, and never slept better in my life.
The Counterpane.
Upon waking next morning about daylight, I found Queequeg's armthrown over me in the most loving and affectionate manner.
You hadalmost thought I had been his wife.
The counterpane was ofpatchwork, full of odd little parti-coloured squares and triangles;and this arm of his tattooed all over with an interminable Cretanlabyrinth of a figure, no two parts of which were of one preciseshade--owing I suppose to his keeping his arm at sea unmethodicallyin sun and shade, his shirt sleeves irregularly rolled up at varioustimes--this same arm of his, I say, looked for all the world like astrip of that same patchwork quilt.
Indeed, partly lying on it asthe arm did when I first awoke, I could hardly tell it from thequilt, they so blended their hues together; and it was only by thesense of weight and pressure that I could tell that Queequeg washugging me.
My sensations were strange.
Let me try to explain them.
When I wasa child, I well remember a somewhat similar circumstance that befellme; whether it was a reality or a dream, I never could entirelysettle.
The circumstance was this.
I had been cutting up some caperor other--I think it was trying to crawl up the chimney, as I hadseen a little sweep do a few days previous; and my stepmother who,somehow or other, was all the time whipping me, or sending me to bedsupperless,--my mother dragged me by the legs out of the chimney andpacked me off to bed, though it was only two o'clock in the afternoonof the 21st June, the longest day in the year in our hemisphere.
Ifelt dreadfully.
But there was no help for it, so up stairs I wentto my little room in the third floor, undressed myself as slowly aspossible so as to kill time, and with a bitter sigh got between thesheets.
I lay there dismally calculating that sixteen entire hours mustelapse before I could hope for a resurrection.
Sixteen hours in bed!the small of my back ached to think of it.
And it was so light too;the sun shining in at the window, and a great rattling of coaches inthe streets, and the sound of gay voices all over the house.
I feltworse and worse--at last I got up, dressed, and softly going down inmy stockinged feet, sought out my stepmother, and suddenly threwmyself at her feet, beseeching her as a particular favour to give me agood slippering for my misbehaviour; anything indeed but condemningme to lie abed such an unendurable length of time.
But she was thebest and most conscientious of stepmothers, and back I had to go tomy room.
For several hours I lay there broad awake, feeling a greatdeal worse than I have ever done since, even from the greatestsubsequent misfortunes.
At last I must have fallen into a troublednightmare of a doze; and slowly waking from it--half steeped indreams--I opened my eyes, and the before sun-lit room was now wrappedin outer darkness.
Instantly I felt a shock running through all myframe; nothing was to be seen, and nothing was to be heard; but asupernatural hand seemed placed in mine.
My arm hung over thecounterpane, and the nameless, unimaginable, silent form or phantom,to which the hand belonged, seemed closely seated by my bed-side.
For what seemed ages piled on ages, I lay there, frozen with the mostawful fears, not daring to drag away my hand; yet ever thinking thatif I could but stir it one single inch, the horrid spell would bebroken.
I knew not how this consciousness at last glided away fromme; but waking in the morning, I shudderingly remembered it all, andfor days and weeks and months afterwards I lost myself in confoundingattempts to explain the mystery.
Nay, to this very hour, I oftenpuzzle myself with it.
Now, take away the awful fear, and my sensations at feeling thesupernatural hand in mine were very similar, in their strangeness,to those which I experienced on waking up and seeing Queequeg's paganarm thrown round me.
But at length all the past night's eventssoberly recurred, one by one, in fixed reality, and then I lay onlyalive to the comical predicament.
For though I tried to move hisarm--unlock his bridegroom clasp--yet, sleeping as he was, he stillhugged me tightly, as though naught but death should part us twain.
I now strove to rouse him--"Queequeg!"--but his only answer was asnore.
I then rolled over, my neck feeling as if it were in ahorse-collar; and suddenly felt a slight scratch.
Throwing aside thecounterpane, there lay the tomahawk sleeping by the savage's side, asif it were a hatchet-faced baby.
A pretty pickle, truly, thought I;abed here in a strange house in the broad day, with a cannibal and atomahawk! "Queequeg!--in the name of goodness, Queequeg, wake!" Atlength, by dint of much wriggling, and loud and incessantexpostulations upon the unbecomingness of his hugging a fellow malein that matrimonial sort of style, I succeeded in extracting a grunt;and presently, he drew back his arm, shook himself all over like aNewfoundland dog just from the water, and sat up in bed, stiff as apike-staff, looking at me, and rubbing his eyes as if he did notaltogether remember how I came to be there, though a dimconsciousness of knowing something about me seemed slowly dawningover him.
Meanwhile, I lay quietly eyeing him, having no seriousmisgivings now, and bent upon narrowly observing so curious acreature.
When, at last, his mind seemed made up touching thecharacter of his bedfellow, and he became, as it were, reconciled tothe fact; he jumped out upon the floor, and by certain signs andsounds gave me to understand that, if it pleased me, he would dressfirst and then leave me to dress afterwards, leaving the wholeapartment to myself.
Thinks I, Queequeg, under the circumstances,this is a very civilized overture; but, the truth is, these savageshave an innate sense of delicacy, say what you will; it is marvelloushow essentially polite they are.
I pay this particular compliment toQueequeg, because he treated me with so much civility andconsideration, while I was guilty of great rudeness; staring at himfrom the bed, and watching all his toilette motions; for the time mycuriosity getting the better of my breeding.
Nevertheless, a manlike Queequeg you don't see every day, he and his ways were wellworth unusual regarding.
He commenced dressing at top by donning his beaver hat, a very tallone, by the by, and then--still minus his trowsers--he hunted up hisboots.
What under the heavens he did it for, I cannot tell, but hisnext movement was to crush himself--boots in hand, and hat on--underthe bed; when, from sundry violent gaspings and strainings, Iinferred he was hard at work booting himself; though by no law ofpropriety that I ever heard of, is any man required to be privatewhen putting on his boots.
But Queequeg, do you see, was a creaturein the transition stage--neither caterpillar nor butterfly.
He wasjust enough civilized to show off his outlandishness in the strangestpossible manners.
His education was not yet completed.
He was anundergraduate.
If he had not been a small degree civilized, he veryprobably would not have troubled himself with boots at all; but then,if he had not been still a savage, he never would have dreamt ofgetting under the bed to put them on.
At last, he emerged with hishat very much dented and crushed down over his eyes, and begancreaking and limping about the room, as if, not being much accustomedto boots, his pair of damp, wrinkled cowhide ones--probably not madeto order either--rather pinched and tormented him at the first go offof a bitter cold morning.
Seeing, now, that there were no curtains to the window, and that thestreet being very narrow, the house opposite commanded a plain viewinto the room, and observing more and more the indecorous figure thatQueequeg made, staving about with little else but his hat and bootson; I begged him as well as I could, to accelerate his toiletsomewhat, and particularly to get into his pantaloons as soon aspossible.
He complied, and then proceeded to wash himself.
At thattime in the morning any Christian would have washed his face; butQueequeg, to my amazement, contented himself with restricting hisablutions to his chest, arms, and hands.
He then donned hiswaistcoat, and taking up a piece of hard soap on the wash-standcentre table, dipped it into water and commenced lathering his face.
I was watching to see where he kept his razor, when lo and behold, hetakes the harpoon from the bed corner, slips out the long woodenstock, unsheathes the head, whets it a little on his boot, andstriding up to the bit of mirror against the wall, begins a vigorousscraping, or rather harpooning of his cheeks.
Thinks I, Queequeg,this is using Rogers's best cutlery with a vengeance.
Afterwards Iwondered the less at this operation when I came to know of what finesteel the head of a harpoon is made, and how exceedingly sharp thelong straight edges are always kept.
The rest of his toilet was soon achieved, and he proudly marched outof the room, wrapped up in his great pilot monkey jacket, andsporting his harpoon like a marshal's baton.
Breakfast.
I quickly followed suit, and descending into the bar-room accostedthe grinning landlord very pleasantly.
I cherished no malice towardshim, though he had been skylarking with me not a little in the matterof my bedfellow.
However, a good laugh is a mighty good thing, and rather too scarce agood thing; the more's the pity.
So, if any one man, in his ownproper person, afford stuff for a good joke to anybody, let him notbe backward, but let him cheerfully allow himself to spend and bespent in that way.
And the man that has anything bountifullylaughable about him, be sure there is more in that man than youperhaps think for.
The bar-room was now full of the boarders who had been dropping inthe night previous, and whom I had not as yet had a good look at.
They were nearly all whalemen; chief mates, and second mates, andthird mates, and sea carpenters, and sea coopers, and seablacksmiths, and harpooneers, and ship keepers; a brown and brawnycompany, with bosky beards; an unshorn, shaggy set, all wearingmonkey jackets for morning gowns.
You could pretty plainly tell how long each one had been ashore.
This young fellow's healthy cheek is like a sun-toasted pear in hue,and would seem to smell almost as musky; he cannot have been threedays landed from his Indian voyage.
That man next him looks a fewshades lighter; you might say a touch of satin wood is in him.
Inthe complexion of a third still lingers a tropic tawn, but slightlybleached withal; HE doubtless has tarried whole weeks ashore.
Butwho could show a cheek like Queequeg? which, barred with varioustints, seemed like the Andes' western slope, to show forth in onearray, contrasting climates, zone by zone.
"Grub, ho!" now cried the landlord, flinging open a door, and in wewent to breakfast.
They say that men who have seen the world, thereby become quite atease in manner, quite self-possessed in company.
Not always, though:Ledyard, the great New England traveller, and Mungo Park, the Scotchone; of all men, they possessed the least assurance in the parlor.
But perhaps the mere crossing of Siberia in a sledge drawn by dogs asLedyard did, or the taking a long solitary walk on an empty stomach,in the negro heart of Africa, which was the sum of poor Mungo'sperformances--this kind of travel, I say, may not be the very bestmode of attaining a high social polish.
Still, for the most part,that sort of thing is to be had anywhere.
These reflections just here are occasioned by the circumstance thatafter we were all seated at the table, and I was preparing to hearsome good stories about whaling; to my no small surprise, nearlyevery man maintained a profound silence.
And not only that, but theylooked embarrassed.
Yes, here were a set of sea-dogs, many of whomwithout the slightest bashfulness had boarded great whales on thehigh seas--entire strangers to them--and duelled them dead withoutwinking; and yet, here they sat at a social breakfast table--all ofthe same calling, all of kindred tastes--looking round as sheepishlyat each other as though they had never been out of sight of somesheepfold among the Green Mountains.
A curious sight; these bashfulbears, these timid warrior whalemen!But as for Queequeg--why, Queequeg sat there among them--at the headof the table, too, it so chanced; as cool as an icicle.
To be sure Icannot say much for his breeding.
His greatest admirer could nothave cordially justified his bringing his harpoon into breakfast withhim, and using it there without ceremony; reaching over the tablewith it, to the imminent jeopardy of many heads, and grappling thebeefsteaks towards him.
But THAT was certainly very coolly done byhim, and every one knows that in most people's estimation, to doanything coolly is to do it genteelly.
We will not speak of all Queequeg's peculiarities here; how heeschewed coffee and hot rolls, and applied his undivided attention tobeefsteaks, done rare.
Enough, that when breakfast was over hewithdrew like the rest into the public room, lighted histomahawk-pipe, and was sitting there quietly digesting and smokingwith his inseparable hat on, when I sallied out for a stroll.
The Street.
If I had been astonished at first catching a glimpse of so outlandishan individual as Queequeg circulating among the polite society of acivilized town, that astonishment soon departed upon taking my firstdaylight stroll through the streets of New Bedford.
In thoroughfares nigh the docks, any considerable seaport willfrequently offer to view the queerest looking nondescripts fromforeign parts.
Even in Broadway and Chestnut streets, Mediterraneanmariners will sometimes jostle the affrighted ladies.
Regent Streetis not unknown to Lascars and Malays; and at Bombay, in the ApolloGreen, live Yankees have often scared the natives.
But New Bedfordbeats all Water Street and Wapping.
In these last-mentioned hauntsyou see only sailors; but in New Bedford, actual cannibals standchatting at street corners; savages outright; many of whom yet carryon their bones unholy flesh.
It makes a stranger stare.
But, besides the Feegeeans, Tongatobooarrs, Erromanggoans,Pannangians, and Brighggians, and, besides the wild specimens of thewhaling-craft which unheeded reel about the streets, you will seeother sights still more curious, certainly more comical.
Thereweekly arrive in this town scores of green Vermonters and NewHampshire men, all athirst for gain and glory in the fishery.
Theyare mostly young, of stalwart frames; fellows who have felledforests, and now seek to drop the axe and snatch the whale-lance.
Many are as green as the Green Mountains whence they came.
In somethings you would think them but a few hours old.
Look there! thatchap strutting round the corner.
He wears a beaver hat andswallow-tailed coat, girdled with a sailor-belt and sheath-knife.
Here comes another with a sou'-wester and a bombazine cloak.
No town-bred dandy will compare with a country-bred one--I mean adownright bumpkin dandy--a fellow that, in the dog-days, will mow histwo acres in buckskin gloves for fear of tanning his hands.
Now whena country dandy like this takes it into his head to make adistinguished reputation, and joins the great whale-fishery, youshould see the comical things he does upon reaching the seaport.
Inbespeaking his sea-outfit, he orders bell-buttons to his waistcoats;straps to his canvas trowsers.
Ah, poor Hay-Seed! how bitterly willburst those straps in the first howling gale, when thou art driven,straps, buttons, and all, down the throat of the tempest.
But think not that this famous town has only harpooneers, cannibals,and bumpkins to show her visitors.
Not at all.
Still New Bedford isa queer place.
Had it not been for us whalemen, that tract of landwould this day perhaps have been in as howling condition as the coastof Labrador.
As it is, parts of her back country are enough tofrighten one, they look so bony.
The town itself is perhaps thedearest place to live in, in all New England.
It is a land of oil,true enough: but not like Canaan; a land, also, of corn and wine.
The streets do not run with milk; nor in the spring-time do they pavethem with fresh eggs.
Yet, in spite of this, nowhere in all Americawill you find more patrician-like houses; parks and gardens moreopulent, than in New Bedford.
Whence came they? how planted uponthis once scraggy scoria of a country?Go and gaze upon the iron emblematical harpoons round yonder loftymansion, and your question will be answered.
Yes; all these bravehouses and flowery gardens came from the Atlantic, Pacific, andIndian oceans.
One and all, they were harpooned and dragged uphither from the bottom of the sea.
Can Herr Alexander perform a featlike that?In New Bedford, fathers, they say, give whales for dowers to theirdaughters, and portion off their nieces with a few porpoises a-piece.
You must go to New Bedford to see a brilliant wedding; for, theysay, they have reservoirs of oil in every house, and every nightrecklessly burn their lengths in spermaceti candles.
In summer time, the town is sweet to see; full of fine maples--longavenues of green and gold.
And in August, high in air, the beautifuland bountiful horse-chestnuts, candelabra-wise, proffer the passer-bytheir tapering upright cones of congregated blossoms.
So omnipotentis art; which in many a district of New Bedford has superinducedbright terraces of flowers upon the barren refuse rocks thrown asideat creation's final day.
And the women of New Bedford, they bloom like their own red roses.
But roses only bloom in summer; whereas the fine carnation of theircheeks is perennial as sunlight in the seventh heavens.
Elsewherematch that bloom of theirs, ye cannot, save in Salem, where they tellme the young girls breathe such musk, their sailor sweethearts smellthem miles off shore, as though they were drawing nigh the odorousMoluccas instead of the Puritanic sands.
The Chapel.
In this same New Bedford there stands a Whaleman's Chapel, and feware the moody fishermen, shortly bound for the Indian Ocean orPacific, who fail to make a Sunday visit to the spot.
I am sure thatI did not.
Returning from my first morning stroll, I again sallied out upon thisspecial errand.
The sky had changed from clear, sunny cold, todriving sleet and mist.
Wrapping myself in my shaggy jacket of thecloth called bearskin, I fought my way against the stubborn storm.
Entering, I found a small scattered congregation of sailors, andsailors' wives and widows.
A muffled silence reigned, only broken attimes by the shrieks of the storm.
Each silent worshipper seemedpurposely sitting apart from the other, as if each silent grief wereinsular and incommunicable.
The chaplain had not yet arrived; andthere these silent islands of men and women sat steadfastly eyeingseveral marble tablets, with black borders, masoned into the wall oneither side the pulpit.
Three of them ran something like thefollowing, but I do not pretend to quote:--SACREDTO THE MEMORYOFJOHN TALBOT,Who, at the age of eighteen, was lost overboard,Near the Isle of Desolation, off Patagonia,November 1st, 1836.
THIS TABLETIs erected to his MemoryBY HISSISTER.
_____________SACREDTO THE MEMORYOFROBERT LONG, WILLIS ELLERY,NATHAN COLEMAN, WALTER CANNY, SETH MACY,AND SAMUEL GLEIG,Forming one of the boats' crewsOFTHE SHIP ELIZAWho were towed out of sight by a Whale,On the Off-shore Ground in thePACIFIC,December 31st, 1839.
THIS MARBLEIs here placed by their survivingSHIPMATES.
_____________SACREDTO THE MEMORYOFThe lateCAPTAIN EZEKIEL HARDY,Who in the bows of his boat was killed by aSperm Whale on the coast of Japan,AUGUST 3d, 1833.
THIS TABLETIs erected to his MemoryBYHIS WIDOW.
Shaking off the sleet from my ice-glazed hat and jacket, I seatedmyself near the door, and turning sideways was surprised to seeQueequeg near me.
Affected by the solemnity of the scene, there wasa wondering gaze of incredulous curiosity in his countenance.
Thissavage was the only person present who seemed to notice my entrance;because he was the only one who could not read, and, therefore, wasnot reading those frigid inscriptions on the wall.
Whether any ofthe relatives of the seamen whose names appeared there were now amongthe congregation, I knew not; but so many are the unrecordedaccidents in the fishery, and so plainly did several women presentwear the countenance if not the trappings of some unceasing grief,that I feel sure that here before me were assembled those, in whoseunhealing hearts the sight of those bleak tablets sympatheticallycaused the old wounds to bleed afresh.
Oh! ye whose dead lie buried beneath the green grass; who standingamong flowers can say--here, HERE lies my beloved; ye know not thedesolation that broods in bosoms like these.
What bitter blanks inthose black-bordered marbles which cover no ashes! What despair inthose immovable inscriptions! What deadly voids and unbiddeninfidelities in the lines that seem to gnaw upon all Faith, andrefuse resurrections to the beings who have placelessly perishedwithout a grave.
As well might those tablets stand in the cave ofElephanta as here.
In what census of living creatures, the dead of mankind are included;why it is that a universal proverb says of them, that they tell notales, though containing more secrets than the Goodwin Sands; how itis that to his name who yesterday departed for the other world, weprefix so significant and infidel a word, and yet do not thus entitlehim, if he but embarks for the remotest Indies of this living earth;why the Life Insurance Companies pay death-forfeitures uponimmortals; in what eternal, unstirring paralysis, and deadly,hopeless trance, yet lies antique Adam who died sixty round centuriesago; how it is that we still refuse to be comforted for those who wenevertheless maintain are dwelling in unspeakable bliss; why all theliving so strive to hush all the dead; wherefore but the rumor of aknocking in a tomb will terrify a whole city.
All these things arenot without their meanings.
But Faith, like a jackal, feeds among the tombs, and even from thesedead doubts she gathers her most vital hope.
It needs scarcely to be told, with what feelings, on the eve of aNantucket voyage, I regarded those marble tablets, and by the murkylight of that darkened, doleful day read the fate of the whalemen whohad gone before me.
Yes, Ishmael, the same fate may be thine.
Butsomehow I grew merry again.
Delightful inducements to embark, finechance for promotion, it seems--aye, a stove boat will make me animmortal by brevet.
Yes, there is death in this business ofwhaling--a speechlessly quick chaotic bundling of a man intoEternity.
But what then? Methinks we have hugely mistaken thismatter of Life and Death.
Methinks that what they call my shadowhere on earth is my true substance.
Methinks that in looking atthings spiritual, we are too much like oysters observing the sunthrough the water, and thinking that thick water the thinnest of air.
Methinks my body is but the lees of my better being.
In fact takemy body who will, take it I say, it is not me.
And therefore threecheers for Nantucket; and come a stove boat and stove body when theywill, for stave my soul, Jove himself cannot.
The Pulpit.
I had not been seated very long ere a man of a certain venerablerobustness entered; immediately as the storm-pelted door flew backupon admitting him, a quick regardful eyeing of him by all thecongregation, sufficiently attested that this fine old man was thechaplain.
Yes, it was the famous Father Mapple, so called by thewhalemen, among whom he was a very great favourite.
He had been asailor and a harpooneer in his youth, but for many years past haddedicated his life to the ministry.
At the time I now write of,Father Mapple was in the hardy winter of a healthy old age; that sortof old age which seems merging into a second flowering youth, foramong all the fissures of his wrinkles, there shone certain mildgleams of a newly developing bloom--the spring verdure peeping fortheven beneath February's snow.
No one having previously heard hishistory, could for the first time behold Father Mapple without theutmost interest, because there were certain engrafted clericalpeculiarities about him, imputable to that adventurous maritime lifehe had led.
When he entered I observed that he carried no umbrella,and certainly had not come in his carriage, for his tarpaulin hat randown with melting sleet, and his great pilot cloth jacket seemedalmost to drag him to the floor with the weight of the water it hadabsorbed.
However, hat and coat and overshoes were one by oneremoved, and hung up in a little space in an adjacent corner; when,arrayed in a decent suit, he quietly approached the pulpit.
Like most old fashioned pulpits, it was a very lofty one, and since aregular stairs to such a height would, by its long angle with thefloor, seriously contract the already small area of the chapel, thearchitect, it seemed, had acted upon the hint of Father Mapple, andfinished the pulpit without a stairs, substituting a perpendicularside ladder, like those used in mounting a ship from a boat at sea.
The wife of a whaling captain had provided the chapel with a handsomepair of red worsted man-ropes for this ladder, which, being itselfnicely headed, and stained with a mahogany colour, the wholecontrivance, considering what manner of chapel it was, seemed by nomeans in bad taste.
Halting for an instant at the foot of theladder, and with both hands grasping the ornamental knobs of theman-ropes, Father Mapple cast a look upwards, and then with a trulysailor-like but still reverential dexterity, hand over hand, mountedthe steps as if ascending the main-top of his vessel.
The perpendicular parts of this side ladder, as is usually the casewith swinging ones, were of cloth-covered rope, only the rounds wereof wood, so that at every step there was a joint.
At my firstglimpse of the pulpit, it had not escaped me that however convenientfor a ship, these joints in the present instance seemed unnecessary.
For I was not prepared to see Father Mapple after gaining the height,slowly turn round, and stooping over the pulpit, deliberately drag upthe ladder step by step, till the whole was deposited within, leavinghim impregnable in his little Quebec.
I pondered some time without fully comprehending the reason for this.
Father Mapple enjoyed such a wide reputation for sincerity andsanctity, that I could not suspect him of courting notoriety by anymere tricks of the stage.
No, thought I, there must be some soberreason for this thing; furthermore, it must symbolize somethingunseen.
Can it be, then, that by that act of physical isolation, hesignifies his spiritual withdrawal for the time, from all outwardworldly ties and connexions? Yes, for replenished with the meat andwine of the word, to the faithful man of God, this pulpit, I see, isa self-containing stronghold--a lofty Ehrenbreitstein, with aperennial well of water within the walls.
But the side ladder was not the only strange feature of the place,borrowed from the chaplain's former sea-farings.
Between the marblecenotaphs on either hand of the pulpit, the wall which formed itsback was adorned with a large painting representing a gallant shipbeating against a terrible storm off a lee coast of black rocks andsnowy breakers.
But high above the flying scud and dark-rollingclouds, there floated a little isle of sunlight, from which beamedforth an angel's face; and this bright face shed a distinct spot ofradiance upon the ship's tossed deck, something like that silverplate now inserted into the Victory's plank where Nelson fell.
"Ah,noble ship," the angel seemed to say, "beat on, beat on, thou nobleship, and bear a hardy helm; for lo! the sun is breaking through; theclouds are rolling off--serenest azure is at hand.
"Nor was the pulpit itself without a trace of the same sea-taste thathad achieved the ladder and the picture.
Its panelled front was inthe likeness of a ship's bluff bows, and the Holy Bible rested on aprojecting piece of scroll work, fashioned after a ship'sfiddle-headed beak.
What could be more full of meaning?--for the pulpit is ever thisearth's foremost part; all the rest comes in its rear; the pulpitleads the world.
From thence it is the storm of God's quick wrath isfirst descried, and the bow must bear the earliest brunt.
Fromthence it is the God of breezes fair or foul is first invoked forfavourable winds.
Yes, the world's a ship on its passage out, and nota voyage complete; and the pulpit is its prow.
The Sermon.
Father Mapple rose, and in a mild voice of unassuming authorityordered the scattered people to condense.
"Starboard gangway,there! side away to larboard--larboard gangway to starboard!Midships! midships!"There was a low rumbling of heavy sea-boots among the benches, and astill slighter shuffling of women's shoes, and all was quiet again,and every eye on the preacher.
He paused a little; then kneeling in the pulpit's bows, folded hislarge brown hands across his chest, uplifted his closed eyes, andoffered a prayer so deeply devout that he seemed kneeling and prayingat the bottom of the sea.
This ended, in prolonged solemn tones, like the continual tolling ofa bell in a ship that is foundering at sea in a fog--in such tones hecommenced reading the following hymn; but changing his manner towardsthe concluding stanzas, burst forth with a pealing exultation andjoy--"The ribs and terrors in the whale,Arched over me a dismal gloom,While all God's sun-lit waves rolled by,And lift me deepening down to doom.
"I saw the opening maw of hell,With endless pains and sorrows there;Which none but they that feel can tell--Oh, I was plunging to despair.
"In black distress, I called my God,When I could scarce believe him mine,He bowed his ear to my complaints--No more the whale did me confine.
"With speed he flew to my relief,As on a radiant dolphin borne;Awful, yet bright, as lightning shoneThe face of my Deliverer God.
"My song for ever shall recordThat terrible, that joyful hour;I give the glory to my God,His all the mercy and the power.
Nearly all joined in singing this hymn, which swelled high above thehowling of the storm.
A brief pause ensued; the preacher slowlyturned over the leaves of the Bible, and at last, folding his handdown upon the proper page, said: "Beloved shipmates, clinch the lastverse of the first chapter of Jonah--'And God had prepared a greatfish to swallow up Jonah.
'""Shipmates, this book, containing only four chapters--four yarns--isone of the smallest strands in the mighty cable of the Scriptures.
Yet what depths of the soul does Jonah's deep sealine sound! what apregnant lesson to us is this prophet! What a noble thing is thatcanticle in the fish's belly! How billow-like and boisterouslygrand! We feel the floods surging over us; we sound with him to thekelpy bottom of the waters; sea-weed and all the slime of the sea isabout us! But WHAT is this lesson that the book of Jonah teaches?Shipmates, it is a two-stranded lesson; a lesson to us all as sinfulmen, and a lesson to me as a pilot of the living God.
As sinful men,it is a lesson to us all, because it is a story of the sin,hard-heartedness, suddenly awakened fears, the swift punishment,repentance, prayers, and finally the deliverance and joy of Jonah.
As with all sinners among men, the sin of this son of Amittai was inhis wilful disobedience of the command of God--never mind now whatthat command was, or how conveyed--which he found a hard command.
But all the things that God would have us do are hard for us todo--remember that--and hence, he oftener commands us than endeavorsto persuade.
And if we obey God, we must disobey ourselves; and itis in this disobeying ourselves, wherein the hardness of obeying Godconsists.
"With this sin of disobedience in him, Jonah still further flouts atGod, by seeking to flee from Him.
He thinks that a ship made by menwill carry him into countries where God does not reign, but only theCaptains of this earth.
He skulks about the wharves of Joppa, andseeks a ship that's bound for Tarshish.
There lurks, perhaps, ahitherto unheeded meaning here.
By all accounts Tarshish could havebeen no other city than the modern Cadiz.
That's the opinion oflearned men.
And where is Cadiz, shipmates? Cadiz is in Spain; asfar by water, from Joppa, as Jonah could possibly have sailed inthose ancient days, when the Atlantic was an almost unknown sea.
Because Joppa, the modern Jaffa, shipmates, is on the most easterlycoast of the Mediterranean, the Syrian; and Tarshish or Cadiz morethan two thousand miles to the westward from that, just outside theStraits of Gibraltar.
See ye not then, shipmates, that Jonah soughtto flee world-wide from God? Miserable man! Oh! most contemptibleand worthy of all scorn; with slouched hat and guilty eye, skulkingfrom his God; prowling among the shipping like a vile burglarhastening to cross the seas.
So disordered, self-condemning is hislook, that had there been policemen in those days, Jonah, on the meresuspicion of something wrong, had been arrested ere he touched adeck.
How plainly he's a fugitive! no baggage, not a hat-box,valise, or carpet-bag,--no friends accompany him to the wharf withtheir adieux.
At last, after much dodging search, he finds theTarshish ship receiving the last items of her cargo; and as he stepson board to see its Captain in the cabin, all the sailors for themoment desist from hoisting in the goods, to mark the stranger's evileye.
Jonah sees this; but in vain he tries to look all ease andconfidence; in vain essays his wretched smile.
Strong intuitions ofthe man assure the mariners he can be no innocent.
In their gamesomebut still serious way, one whispers to the other--"Jack, he's robbeda widow;" or, "Joe, do you mark him; he's a bigamist;" or, "Harrylad, I guess he's the adulterer that broke jail in old Gomorrah, orbelike, one of the missing murderers from Sodom.
" Another runs toread the bill that's stuck against the spile upon the wharf to whichthe ship is moored, offering five hundred gold coins for theapprehension of a parricide, and containing a description of hisperson.
He reads, and looks from Jonah to the bill; while all hissympathetic shipmates now crowd round Jonah, prepared to lay theirhands upon him.
Frighted Jonah trembles, and summoning all hisboldness to his face, only looks so much the more a coward.
He willnot confess himself suspected; but that itself is strong suspicion.
So he makes the best of it; and when the sailors find him not to bethe man that is advertised, they let him pass, and he descends intothe cabin.
"'Who's there?' cries the Captain at his busy desk, hurriedly makingout his papers for the Customs--'Who's there?' Oh! how that harmlessquestion mangles Jonah! For the instant he almost turns to fleeagain.
But he rallies.
'I seek a passage in this ship to Tarshish;how soon sail ye, sir?' Thus far the busy Captain had not looked upto Jonah, though the man now stands before him; but no sooner does hehear that hollow voice, than he darts a scrutinizing glance.
'Wesail with the next coming tide,' at last he slowly answered, stillintently eyeing him.
'No sooner, sir?'--'Soon enough for any honestman that goes a passenger.
' Ha! Jonah, that's another stab.
But heswiftly calls away the Captain from that scent.
'I'll sail withye,'--he says,--'the passage money how much is that?--I'll pay now.
'For it is particularly written, shipmates, as if it were a thing notto be overlooked in this history, 'that he paid the fare thereof' erethe craft did sail.
And taken with the context, this is full ofmeaning.
"Now Jonah's Captain, shipmates, was one whose discernment detectscrime in any, but whose cupidity exposes it only in the penniless.
In this world, shipmates, sin that pays its way can travel freely,and without a passport; whereas Virtue, if a pauper, is stopped atall frontiers.
So Jonah's Captain prepares to test the length ofJonah's purse, ere he judge him openly.
He charges him thrice theusual sum; and it's assented to.
Then the Captain knows that Jonahis a fugitive; but at the same time resolves to help a flight thatpaves its rear with gold.
Yet when Jonah fairly takes out his purse,prudent suspicions still molest the Captain.
He rings every coin tofind a counterfeit.
Not a forger, any way, he mutters; and Jonah isput down for his passage.
'Point out my state-room, Sir,' says Jonahnow, 'I'm travel-weary; I need sleep.
' 'Thou lookest like it,' saysthe Captain, 'there's thy room.
' Jonah enters, and would lock thedoor, but the lock contains no key.
Hearing him foolishly fumblingthere, the Captain laughs lowly to himself, and mutters somethingabout the doors of convicts' cells being never allowed to be lockedwithin.
All dressed and dusty as he is, Jonah throws himself intohis berth, and finds the little state-room ceiling almost resting onhis forehead.
The air is close, and Jonah gasps.
Then, in thatcontracted hole, sunk, too, beneath the ship's water-line, Jonahfeels the heralding presentiment of that stifling hour, when thewhale shall hold him in the smallest of his bowels' wards.
"Screwed at its axis against the side, a swinging lamp slightlyoscillates in Jonah's room; and the ship, heeling over towards thewharf with the weight of the last bales received, the lamp, flame andall, though in slight motion, still maintains a permanent obliquitywith reference to the room; though, in truth, infallibly straightitself, it but made obvious the false, lying levels among which ithung.
The lamp alarms and frightens Jonah; as lying in his berth histormented eyes roll round the place, and this thus far successfulfugitive finds no refuge for his restless glance.
But thatcontradiction in the lamp more and more appals him.
The floor, theceiling, and the side, are all awry.
'Oh! so my conscience hangs inme!' he groans, 'straight upwards, so it burns; but the chambers ofmy soul are all in crookedness!'"Like one who after a night of drunken revelry hies to his bed, stillreeling, but with conscience yet pricking him, as the plungings ofthe Roman race-horse but so much the more strike his steel tags intohim; as one who in that miserable plight still turns and turns ingiddy anguish, praying God for annihilation until the fit be passed;and at last amid the whirl of woe he feels, a deep stupor steals overhim, as over the man who bleeds to death, for conscience is thewound, and there's naught to staunch it; so, after sore wrestlings inhis berth, Jonah's prodigy of ponderous misery drags him drowningdown to sleep.
"And now the time of tide has come; the ship casts off her cables;and from the deserted wharf the uncheered ship for Tarshish, allcareening, glides to sea.
That ship, my friends, was the first ofrecorded smugglers! the contraband was Jonah.
But the sea rebels; hewill not bear the wicked burden.
A dreadful storm comes on, theship is like to break.
But now when the boatswain calls all hands tolighten her; when boxes, bales, and jars are clattering overboard;when the wind is shrieking, and the men are yelling, and every plankthunders with trampling feet right over Jonah's head; in all thisraging tumult, Jonah sleeps his hideous sleep.
He sees no black skyand raging sea, feels not the reeling timbers, and little hears he orheeds he the far rush of the mighty whale, which even now with openmouth is cleaving the seas after him.
Aye, shipmates, Jonah was gonedown into the sides of the ship--a berth in the cabin as I have takenit, and was fast asleep.
But the frightened master comes to him, andshrieks in his dead ear, 'What meanest thou, O, sleeper! arise!'Startled from his lethargy by that direful cry, Jonah staggers to hisfeet, and stumbling to the deck, grasps a shroud, to look out uponthe sea.
But at that moment he is sprung upon by a panther billowleaping over the bulwarks.
Wave after wave thus leaps into the ship,and finding no speedy vent runs roaring fore and aft, till themariners come nigh to drowning while yet afloat.
And ever, as thewhite moon shows her affrighted face from the steep gullies in theblackness overhead, aghast Jonah sees the rearing bowsprit pointinghigh upward, but soon beat downward again towards the tormented deep.
"Terrors upon terrors run shouting through his soul.
In all hiscringing attitudes, the God-fugitive is now too plainly known.
Thesailors mark him; more and more certain grow their suspicions of him,and at last, fully to test the truth, by referring the whole matterto high Heaven, they fall to casting lots, to see for whosecause this great tempest was upon them.
The lot is Jonah's; thatdiscovered, then how furiously they mob him with their questions.
'What is thine occupation? Whence comest thou? Thy country? Whatpeople? But mark now, my shipmates, the behavior of poor Jonah.
Theeager mariners but ask him who he is, and where from; whereas, theynot only receive an answer to those questions, but likewise anotheranswer to a question not put by them, but the unsolicited answer isforced from Jonah by the hard hand of God that is upon him.
"'I am a Hebrew,' he cries--and then--'I fear the Lord the God ofHeaven who hath made the sea and the dry land!' Fear him, O Jonah?Aye, well mightest thou fear the Lord God THEN! Straightway, he nowgoes on to make a full confession; whereupon the mariners became moreand more appalled, but still are pitiful.
For when Jonah, not yetsupplicating God for mercy, since he but too well knew the darknessof his deserts,--when wretched Jonah cries out to them to take himand cast him forth into the sea, for he knew that for HIS sake thisgreat tempest was upon them; they mercifully turn from him, and seekby other means to save the ship.
But all in vain; the indignant galehowls louder; then, with one hand raised invokingly to God, with theother they not unreluctantly lay hold of Jonah.
"And now behold Jonah taken up as an anchor and dropped into the sea;when instantly an oily calmness floats out from the east, and the seais still, as Jonah carries down the gale with him, leaving smoothwater behind.
He goes down in the whirling heart of such amasterless commotion that he scarce heeds the moment when he dropsseething into the yawning jaws awaiting him; and the whale shoots-toall his ivory teeth, like so many white bolts, upon his prison.
ThenJonah prayed unto the Lord out of the fish's belly.
But observe hisprayer, and learn a weighty lesson.
For sinful as he is, Jonah doesnot weep and wail for direct deliverance.
He feels that his dreadfulpunishment is just.
He leaves all his deliverance to God, contentinghimself with this, that spite of all his pains and pangs, he willstill look towards His holy temple.
And here, shipmates, is true andfaithful repentance; not clamorous for pardon, but grateful forpunishment.
And how pleasing to God was this conduct in Jonah, isshown in the eventual deliverance of him from the sea and the whale.
Shipmates, I do not place Jonah before you to be copied for his sinbut I do place him before you as a model for repentance.
Sin not;but if you do, take heed to repent of it like Jonah.
"While he was speaking these words, the howling of the shrieking,slanting storm without seemed to add new power to the preacher, who,when describing Jonah's sea-storm, seemed tossed by a storm himself.
His deep chest heaved as with a ground-swell; his tossed arms seemedthe warring elements at work; and the thunders that rolled away fromoff his swarthy brow, and the light leaping from his eye, made allhis simple hearers look on him with a quick fear that was strange tothem.
There now came a lull in his look, as he silently turned over theleaves of the Book once more; and, at last, standing motionless, withclosed eyes, for the moment, seemed communing with God and himself.
But again he leaned over towards the people, and bowing his headlowly, with an aspect of the deepest yet manliest humility, he spakethese words:"Shipmates, God has laid but one hand upon you; both his hands pressupon me.
I have read ye by what murky light may be mine the lessonthat Jonah teaches to all sinners; and therefore to ye, and stillmore to me, for I am a greater sinner than ye.
And now how gladlywould I come down from this mast-head and sit on the hatches therewhere you sit, and listen as you listen, while some one of you readsME that other and more awful lesson which Jonah teaches to ME, as apilot of the living God.
How being an anointed pilot-prophet, orspeaker of true things, and bidden by the Lord to sound thoseunwelcome truths in the ears of a wicked Nineveh, Jonah, appalled atthe hostility he should raise, fled from his mission, and sought toescape his duty and his God by taking ship at Joppa.
But God iseverywhere; Tarshish he never reached.
As we have seen, God cameupon him in the whale, and swallowed him down to living gulfs ofdoom, and with swift slantings tore him along 'into the midst of theseas,' where the eddying depths sucked him ten thousand fathoms down,and 'the weeds were wrapped about his head,' and all the watery worldof woe bowled over him.
Yet even then beyond the reach of anyplummet--'out of the belly of hell'--when the whale grounded upon theocean's utmost bones, even then, God heard the engulphed, repentingprophet when he cried.
Then God spake unto the fish; and from theshuddering cold and blackness of the sea, the whale came breeching uptowards the warm and pleasant sun, and all the delights of air andearth; and 'vomited out Jonah upon the dry land;' when the word ofthe Lord came a second time; and Jonah, bruised and beaten--his ears,like two sea-shells, still multitudinously murmuring of theocean--Jonah did the Almighty's bidding.
And what was that,shipmates? To preach the Truth to the face of Falsehood! That wasit!"This, shipmates, this is that other lesson; and woe to that pilot ofthe living God who slights it.
Woe to him whom this world charmsfrom Gospel duty! Woe to him who seeks to pour oil upon the waterswhen God has brewed them into a gale! Woe to him who seeks to pleaserather than to appal! Woe to him whose good name is more to him thangoodness! Woe to him who, in this world, courts not dishonour! Woeto him who would not be true, even though to be false were salvation!Yea, woe to him who, as the great Pilot Paul has it, while preachingto others is himself a castaway!"He dropped and fell away from himself for a moment; then lifting hisface to them again, showed a deep joy in his eyes, as he cried outwith a heavenly enthusiasm,--"But oh! shipmates! on the starboardhand of every woe, there is a sure delight; and higher the top ofthat delight, than the bottom of the woe is deep.
Is not themain-truck higher than the kelson is low? Delight is to him--a far,far upward, and inward delight--who against the proud gods andcommodores of this earth, ever stands forth his own inexorable self.
Delight is to him whose strong arms yet support him, when the ship ofthis base treacherous world has gone down beneath him.
Delight is tohim, who gives no quarter in the truth, and kills, burns, anddestroys all sin though he pluck it out from under the robes ofSenators and Judges.
Delight,--top-gallant delight is to him, whoacknowledges no law or lord, but the Lord his God, and is only apatriot to heaven.
Delight is to him, whom all the waves of thebillows of the seas of the boisterous mob can never shake from thissure Keel of the Ages.
And eternal delight and deliciousness will behis, who coming to lay him down, can say with his final breath--OFather!--chiefly known to me by Thy rod--mortal or immortal, here Idie.
I have striven to be Thine, more than to be this world's, ormine own.
Yet this is nothing: I leave eternity to Thee; for whatis man that he should live out the lifetime of his God?"He said no more, but slowly waving a benediction, covered his facewith his hands, and so remained kneeling, till all the people haddeparted, and he was left alone in the place.
A Bosom Friend.
Returning to the Spouter-Inn from the Chapel, I found Queequeg therequite alone; he having left the Chapel before the benediction sometime.
He was sitting on a bench before the fire, with his feet onthe stove hearth, and in one hand was holding close up to his facethat little negro idol of his; peering hard into its face, and with ajack-knife gently whittling away at its nose, meanwhile humming tohimself in his heathenish way.
But being now interrupted, he put up the image; and pretty soon,going to the table, took up a large book there, and placing it on hislap began counting the pages with deliberate regularity; at everyfiftieth page--as I fancied--stopping a moment, looking vacantlyaround him, and giving utterance to a long-drawn gurgling whistle ofastonishment.
He would then begin again at the next fifty; seemingto commence at number one each time, as though he could not countmore than fifty, and it was only by such a large number of fiftiesbeing found together, that his astonishment at the multitude of pageswas excited.
With much interest I sat watching him.
Savage though he was, andhideously marred about the face--at least to my taste--hiscountenance yet had a something in it which was by no meansdisagreeable.
You cannot hide the soul.
Through all his unearthlytattooings, I thought I saw the traces of a simple honest heart; andin his large, deep eyes, fiery black and bold, there seemed tokens ofa spirit that would dare a thousand devils.
And besides all this,there was a certain lofty bearing about the Pagan, which even hisuncouthness could not altogether maim.
He looked like a man who hadnever cringed and never had had a creditor.
Whether it was, too,that his head being shaved, his forehead was drawn out in freer andbrighter relief, and looked more expansive than it otherwise would,this I will not venture to decide; but certain it was his head wasphrenologically an excellent one.
It may seem ridiculous, but itreminded me of General Washington's head, as seen in the popularbusts of him.
It had the same long regularly graded retreating slopefrom above the brows, which were likewise very projecting, like twolong promontories thickly wooded on top.
Queequeg was GeorgeWashington cannibalistically developed.
Whilst I was thus closely scanning him, half-pretending meanwhile tobe looking out at the storm from the casement, he never heeded mypresence, never troubled himself with so much as a single glance; butappeared wholly occupied with counting the pages of the marvellousbook.
Considering how sociably we had been sleeping together thenight previous, and especially considering the affectionate arm I hadfound thrown over me upon waking in the morning, I thought thisindifference of his very strange.
But savages are strange beings; attimes you do not know exactly how to take them.
At first they areoverawing; their calm self-collectedness of simplicity seems aSocratic wisdom.
I had noticed also that Queequeg never consorted atall, or but very little, with the other seamen in the inn.
He madeno advances whatever; appeared to have no desire to enlarge thecircle of his acquaintances.
All this struck me as mighty singular;yet, upon second thoughts, there was something almost sublime in it.
Here was a man some twenty thousand miles from home, by the way ofCape Horn, that is--which was the only way he could get there--thrownamong people as strange to him as though he were in the planetJupiter; and yet he seemed entirely at his ease; preserving theutmost serenity; content with his own companionship; always equal tohimself.
Surely this was a touch of fine philosophy; though no doubthe had never heard there was such a thing as that.
But, perhaps, tobe true philosophers, we mortals should not be conscious of so livingor so striving.
So soon as I hear that such or such a man giveshimself out for a philosopher, I conclude that, like the dyspepticold woman, he must have "broken his digester.
"As I sat there in that now lonely room; the fire burning low, in thatmild stage when, after its first intensity has warmed the air, itthen only glows to be looked at; the evening shades and phantomsgathering round the casements, and peering in upon us silent,solitary twain; the storm booming without in solemn swells; I beganto be sensible of strange feelings.
I felt a melting in me.
No moremy splintered heart and maddened hand were turned against the wolfishworld.
This soothing savage had redeemed it.
There he sat, his veryindifference speaking a nature in which there lurked no civilizedhypocrisies and bland deceits.
Wild he was; a very sight of sightsto see; yet I began to feel myself mysteriously drawn towards him.
And those same things that would have repelled most others, they werethe very magnets that thus drew me.
I'll try a pagan friend, thoughtI, since Christian kindness has proved but hollow courtesy.
I drewmy bench near him, and made some friendly signs and hints, doing mybest to talk with him meanwhile.
At first he little noticed theseadvances; but presently, upon my referring to his last night'shospitalities, he made out to ask me whether we were again to bebedfellows.
I told him yes; whereat I thought he looked pleased,perhaps a little complimented.
We then turned over the book together, and I endeavored to explain tohim the purpose of the printing, and the meaning of the few picturesthat were in it.
Thus I soon engaged his interest; and from that wewent to jabbering the best we could about the various outer sights tobe seen in this famous town.
Soon I proposed a social smoke; and,producing his pouch and tomahawk, he quietly offered me a puff.
Andthen we sat exchanging puffs from that wild pipe of his, and keepingit regularly passing between us.
If there yet lurked any ice of indifference towards me in the Pagan'sbreast, this pleasant, genial smoke we had, soon thawed it out, andleft us cronies.
He seemed to take to me quite as naturally andunbiddenly as I to him; and when our smoke was over, he pressed hisforehead against mine, clasped me round the waist, and said thathenceforth we were married; meaning, in his country's phrase, that wewere bosom friends; he would gladly die for me, if need should be.
In a countryman, this sudden flame of friendship would have seemedfar too premature, a thing to be much distrusted; but in this simplesavage those old rules would not apply.
After supper, and another social chat and smoke, we went to our roomtogether.
He made me a present of his embalmed head; took out hisenormous tobacco wallet, and groping under the tobacco, drew out somethirty dollars in silver; then spreading them on the table, andmechanically dividing them into two equal portions, pushed one ofthem towards me, and said it was mine.
I was going to remonstrate;but he silenced me by pouring them into my trowsers' pockets.
I letthem stay.
He then went about his evening prayers, took out hisidol, and removed the paper fireboard.
By certain signs andsymptoms, I thought he seemed anxious for me to join him; but wellknowing what was to follow, I deliberated a moment whether, in casehe invited me, I would comply or otherwise.
I was a good Christian; born and bred in the bosom of the infalliblePresbyterian Church.
How then could I unite with this wild idolatorin worshipping his piece of wood? But what is worship? thought I.
Do you suppose now, Ishmael, that the magnanimous God of heaven andearth--pagans and all included--can possibly be jealous of aninsignificant bit of black wood? Impossible! But what isworship?--to do the will of God--THAT is worship.
And what is thewill of God?--to do to my fellow man what I would have my fellow manto do to me--THAT is the will of God.
Now, Queequeg is my fellowman.
And what do I wish that this Queequeg would do to me? Why,unite with me in my particular Presbyterian form of worship.
Consequently, I must then unite with him in his; ergo, I must turnidolator.
So I kindled the shavings; helped prop up the innocentlittle idol; offered him burnt biscuit with Queequeg; salamed beforehim twice or thrice; kissed his nose; and that done, we undressed andwent to bed, at peace with our own consciences and all the world.
But we did not go to sleep without some little chat.
How it is I know not; but there is no place like a bed forconfidential disclosures between friends.
Man and wife, they say,there open the very bottom of their souls to each other; and some oldcouples often lie and chat over old times till nearly morning.
Thus,then, in our hearts' honeymoon, lay I and Queequeg--a cosy, lovingpair.
Nightgown.
We had lain thus in bed, chatting and napping at short intervals, andQueequeg now and then affectionately throwing his brown tattooed legsover mine, and then drawing them back; so entirely sociable and freeand easy were we; when, at last, by reason of our confabulations,what little nappishness remained in us altogether departed, and wefelt like getting up again, though day-break was yet some way downthe future.
Yes, we became very wakeful; so much so that our recumbent positionbegan to grow wearisome, and by little and little we found ourselvessitting up; the clothes well tucked around us, leaning against thehead-board with our four knees drawn up close together, and our twonoses bending over them, as if our kneepans were warming-pans.
Wefelt very nice and snug, the more so since it was so chilly out ofdoors; indeed out of bed-clothes too, seeing that there was no firein the room.
The more so, I say, because truly to enjoy bodilywarmth, some small part of you must be cold, for there is no qualityin this world that is not what it is merely by contrast.
Nothingexists in itself.
If you flatter yourself that you are all overcomfortable, and have been so a long time, then you cannot be said tobe comfortable any more.
But if, like Queequeg and me in the bed,the tip of your nose or the crown of your head be slightly chilled,why then, indeed, in the general consciousness you feel mostdelightfully and unmistakably warm.
For this reason a sleepingapartment should never be furnished with a fire, which is one of theluxurious discomforts of the rich.
For the height of this sort ofdeliciousness is to have nothing but the blanket between you andyour snugness and the cold of the outer air.
Then there you lie likethe one warm spark in the heart of an arctic crystal.
We had been sitting in this crouching manner for some time, when allat once I thought I would open my eyes; for when between sheets,whether by day or by night, and whether asleep or awake, I have a wayof always keeping my eyes shut, in order the more to concentrate thesnugness of being in bed.
Because no man can ever feel his ownidentity aright except his eyes be closed; as if darkness wereindeed the proper element of our essences, though light be morecongenial to our clayey part.
Upon opening my eyes then, and comingout of my own pleasant and self-created darkness into the imposed andcoarse outer gloom of the unilluminated twelve-o'clock-at-night, Iexperienced a disagreeable revulsion.
Nor did I at all object to thehint from Queequeg that perhaps it were best to strike a light,seeing that we were so wide awake; and besides he felt a strongdesire to have a few quiet puffs from his Tomahawk.
Be it said, thatthough I had felt such a strong repugnance to his smoking in the bedthe night before, yet see how elastic our stiff prejudices grow whenlove once comes to bend them.
For now I liked nothing better thanto have Queequeg smoking by me, even in bed, because he seemed to befull of such serene household joy then.
I no more felt undulyconcerned for the landlord's policy of insurance.
I was only aliveto the condensed confidential comfortableness of sharing a pipe and ablanket with a real friend.
With our shaggy jackets drawn about ourshoulders, we now passed the Tomahawk from one to the other, tillslowly there grew over us a blue hanging tester of smoke, illuminatedby the flame of the new-lit lamp.
Whether it was that this undulating tester rolled the savage away tofar distant scenes, I know not, but he now spoke of his nativeisland; and, eager to hear his history, I begged him to go on andtell it.
He gladly complied.
Though at the time I but illcomprehended not a few of his words, yet subsequent disclosures, whenI had become more familiar with his broken phraseology, now enable meto present the whole story such as it may prove in the mere skeletonI give.
Biographical.
Queequeg was a native of Rokovoko, an island far away to the Westand South.
It is not down in any map; true places never are.
When a new-hatched savage running wild about his native woodlands ina grass clout, followed by the nibbling goats, as if he were a greensapling; even then, in Queequeg's ambitious soul, lurked a strongdesire to see something more of Christendom than a specimen whaler ortwo.
His father was a High Chief, a King; his uncle a High Priest;and on the maternal side he boasted aunts who were the wives ofunconquerable warriors.
There was excellent blood in hisveins--royal stuff; though sadly vitiated, I fear, by the cannibalpropensity he nourished in his untutored youth.
A Sag Harbor ship visited his father's bay, and Queequeg sought apassage to Christian lands.
But the ship, having her full complementof seamen, spurned his suit; and not all the King his father'sinfluence could prevail.
But Queequeg vowed a vow.
Alone in hiscanoe, he paddled off to a distant strait, which he knew the shipmust pass through when she quitted the island.
On one side was acoral reef; on the other a low tongue of land, covered with mangrovethickets that grew out into the water.
Hiding his canoe, stillafloat, among these thickets, with its prow seaward, he sat down inthe stern, paddle low in hand; and when the ship was gliding by, likea flash he darted out; gained her side; with one backward dash of hisfoot capsized and sank his canoe; climbed up the chains; and throwinghimself at full length upon the deck, grappled a ring-bolt there, andswore not to let it go, though hacked in pieces.
In vain the captain threatened to throw him overboard; suspended acutlass over his naked wrists; Queequeg was the son of a King, andQueequeg budged not.
Struck by his desperate dauntlessness, and hiswild desire to visit Christendom, the captain at last relented, andtold him he might make himself at home.
But this fine youngsavage--this sea Prince of Wales, never saw the Captain's cabin.
They put him down among the sailors, and made a whaleman of him.
Butlike Czar Peter content to toil in the shipyards of foreign cities,Queequeg disdained no seeming ignominy, if thereby he might happilygain the power of enlightening his untutored countrymen.
For atbottom--so he told me--he was actuated by a profound desire to learnamong the Christians, the arts whereby to make his people stillhappier than they were; and more than that, still better than theywere.
But, alas! the practices of whalemen soon convinced him thateven Christians could be both miserable and wicked; infinitely moreso, than all his father's heathens.
Arrived at last in old SagHarbor; and seeing what the sailors did there; and then going on toNantucket, and seeing how they spent their wages in that place also,poor Queequeg gave it up for lost.
Thought he, it's a wicked worldin all meridians; I'll die a pagan.
And thus an old idolator at heart, he yet lived among theseChristians, wore their clothes, and tried to talk their gibberish.
Hence the queer ways about him, though now some time from home.
By hints, I asked him whether he did not propose going back, andhaving a coronation; since he might now consider his father dead andgone, he being very old and feeble at the last accounts.
He answeredno, not yet; and added that he was fearful Christianity, or ratherChristians, had unfitted him for ascending the pure and undefiledthrone of thirty pagan Kings before him.
But by and by, he said, hewould return,--as soon as he felt himself baptized again.
For thenonce, however, he proposed to sail about, and sow his wild oats inall four oceans.
They had made a harpooneer of him, and that barbediron was in lieu of a sceptre now.
I asked him what might be his immediate purpose, touching his futuremovements.
He answered, to go to sea again, in his old vocation.
Upon this, I told him that whaling was my own design, and informedhim of my intention to sail out of Nantucket, as being the mostpromising port for an adventurous whaleman to embark from.
He atonce resolved to accompany me to that island, ship aboard the samevessel, get into the same watch, the same boat, the same mess withme, in short to share my every hap; with both my hands in his, boldlydip into the Potluck of both worlds.
To all this I joyouslyassented; for besides the affection I now felt for Queequeg, he wasan experienced harpooneer, and as such, could not fail to be of greatusefulness to one, who, like me, was wholly ignorant of the mysteriesof whaling, though well acquainted with the sea, as known to merchantseamen.
His story being ended with his pipe's last dying puff, Queequegembraced me, pressed his forehead against mine, and blowing out thelight, we rolled over from each other, this way and that, and verysoon were sleeping.
Wheelbarrow.
Next morning, Monday, after disposing of the embalmed head to abarber, for a block, I settled my own and comrade's bill; using,however, my comrade's money.
The grinning landlord, as well as theboarders, seemed amazingly tickled at the sudden friendship which hadsprung up between me and Queequeg--especially as Peter Coffin's cockand bull stories about him had previously so much alarmed meconcerning the very person whom I now companied with.
We borrowed a wheelbarrow, and embarking our things, including my ownpoor carpet-bag, and Queequeg's canvas sack and hammock, away we wentdown to "the Moss," the little Nantucket packet schooner moored atthe wharf.
As we were going along the people stared; not at Queequegso much--for they were used to seeing cannibals like him in theirstreets,--but at seeing him and me upon such confidential terms.
Butwe heeded them not, going along wheeling the barrow by turns, andQueequeg now and then stopping to adjust the sheath on his harpoonbarbs.
I asked him why he carried such a troublesome thing with himashore, and whether all whaling ships did not find their ownharpoons.
To this, in substance, he replied, that though what Ihinted was true enough, yet he had a particular affection for his ownharpoon, because it was of assured stuff, well tried in many a mortalcombat, and deeply intimate with the hearts of whales.
In short,like many inland reapers and mowers, who go into the farmers' meadowsarmed with their own scythes--though in no wise obliged to furnishthem--even so, Queequeg, for his own private reasons, preferred hisown harpoon.
Shifting the barrow from my hand to his, he told me a funny storyabout the first wheelbarrow he had ever seen.
It was in Sag Harbor.
The owners of his ship, it seems, had lent him one, in which to carryhis heavy chest to his boarding house.
Not to seem ignorant aboutthe thing--though in truth he was entirely so, concerning the preciseway in which to manage the barrow--Queequeg puts his chest upon it;lashes it fast; and then shoulders the barrow and marches up thewharf.
"Why," said I, "Queequeg, you might have known better thanthat, one would think.
Didn't the people laugh?"Upon this, he told me another story.
The people of his island ofRokovoko, it seems, at their wedding feasts express the fragrantwater of young cocoanuts into a large stained calabash like apunchbowl; and this punchbowl always forms the great central ornamenton the braided mat where the feast is held.
Now a certain grandmerchant ship once touched at Rokovoko, and its commander--from allaccounts, a very stately punctilious gentleman, at least for a seacaptain--this commander was invited to the wedding feast ofQueequeg's sister, a pretty young princess just turned of ten.
Well;when all the wedding guests were assembled at the bride's bamboocottage, this Captain marches in, and being assigned the post ofhonour, placed himself over against the punchbowl, and between theHigh Priest and his majesty the King, Queequeg's father.
Grace beingsaid,--for those people have their grace as well as we--thoughQueequeg told me that unlike us, who at such times look downwards toour platters, they, on the contrary, copying the ducks, glanceupwards to the great Giver of all feasts--Grace, I say, being said,the High Priest opens the banquet by the immemorial ceremony of theisland; that is, dipping his consecrated and consecrating fingersinto the bowl before the blessed beverage circulates.
Seeing himselfplaced next the Priest, and noting the ceremony, and thinkinghimself--being Captain of a ship--as having plain precedence over amere island King, especially in the King's own house--the Captaincoolly proceeds to wash his hands in the punchbowl;--taking it Isuppose for a huge finger-glass.
"Now," said Queequeg, "what youtink now?--Didn't our people laugh?"At last, passage paid, and luggage safe, we stood on board theschooner.
Hoisting sail, it glided down the Acushnet river.
On oneside, New Bedford rose in terraces of streets, their ice-coveredtrees all glittering in the clear, cold air.
Huge hills andmountains of casks on casks were piled upon her wharves, and side byside the world-wandering whale ships lay silent and safely moored atlast; while from others came a sound of carpenters and coopers, withblended noises of fires and forges to melt the pitch, all betokeningthat new cruises were on the start; that one most perilous and longvoyage ended, only begins a second; and a second ended, only begins athird, and so on, for ever and for aye.
Such is the endlessness,yea, the intolerableness of all earthly effort.
Gaining the more open water, the bracing breeze waxed fresh; thelittle Moss tossed the quick foam from her bows, as a young colt hissnortings.
How I snuffed that Tartar air!--how I spurned thatturnpike earth!--that common highway all over dented with the marksof slavish heels and hoofs; and turned me to admire the magnanimityof the sea which will permit no records.
At the same foam-fountain, Queequeg seemed to drink and reel with me.
His dusky nostrils swelled apart; he showed his filed and pointedteeth.
On, on we flew; and our offing gained, the Moss did homage tothe blast; ducked and dived her bows as a slave before the Sultan.
Sideways leaning, we sideways darted; every ropeyarn tingling like awire; the two tall masts buckling like Indian canes in landtornadoes.
So full of this reeling scene were we, as we stood by theplunging bowsprit, that for some time we did not notice the jeeringglances of the passengers, a lubber-like assembly, who marvelled thattwo fellow beings should be so companionable; as though a white manwere anything more dignified than a whitewashed negro.
But therewere some boobies and bumpkins there, who, by their intensegreenness, must have come from the heart and centre of all verdure.
Queequeg caught one of these young saplings mimicking him behind hisback.
I thought the bumpkin's hour of doom was come.
Dropping hisharpoon, the brawny savage caught him in his arms, and by an almostmiraculous dexterity and strength, sent him high up bodily into theair; then slightly tapping his stern in mid-somerset, the fellowlanded with bursting lungs upon his feet, while Queequeg, turning hisback upon him, lighted his tomahawk pipe and passed it to me for apuff.
"Capting! Capting! yelled the bumpkin, running towards that officer;"Capting, Capting, here's the devil.
""Hallo, YOU sir," cried the Captain, a gaunt rib of the sea, stalkingup to Queequeg, "what in thunder do you mean by that? Don't you knowyou might have killed that chap?""What him say?" said Queequeg, as he mildly turned to me.
"He say," said I, "that you came near kill-e that man there,"pointing to the still shivering greenhorn.
"Kill-e," cried Queequeg, twisting his tattooed face into anunearthly expression of disdain, "ah! him bevy small-e fish-e;Queequeg no kill-e so small-e fish-e; Queequeg kill-e big whale!""Look you," roared the Captain, "I'll kill-e YOU, you cannibal, ifyou try any more of your tricks aboard here; so mind your eye.
"But it so happened just then, that it was high time for the Captainto mind his own eye.
The prodigious strain upon the main-sail hadparted the weather-sheet, and the tremendous boom was now flying fromside to side, completely sweeping the entire after part of the deck.
The poor fellow whom Queequeg had handled so roughly, was sweptoverboard; all hands were in a panic; and to attempt snatching at theboom to stay it, seemed madness.
It flew from right to left, andback again, almost in one ticking of a watch, and every instantseemed on the point of snapping into splinters.
Nothing was done,and nothing seemed capable of being done; those on deck rushedtowards the bows, and stood eyeing the boom as if it were the lowerjaw of an exasperated whale.
In the midst of this consternation,Queequeg dropped deftly to his knees, and crawling under the path ofthe boom, whipped hold of a rope, secured one end to the bulwarks,and then flinging the other like a lasso, caught it round the boom asit swept over his head, and at the next jerk, the spar was that waytrapped, and all was safe.
The schooner was run into the wind, andwhile the hands were clearing away the stern boat, Queequeg, strippedto the waist, darted from the side with a long living arc of a leap.
For three minutes or more he was seen swimming like a dog, throwinghis long arms straight out before him, and by turns revealing hisbrawny shoulders through the freezing foam.
I looked at the grandand glorious fellow, but saw no one to be saved.
The greenhorn hadgone down.
Shooting himself perpendicularly from the water,Queequeg, now took an instant's glance around him, and seeming to seejust how matters were, dived down and disappeared.
A few minutesmore, and he rose again, one arm still striking out, and with theother dragging a lifeless form.
The boat soon picked them up.
Thepoor bumpkin was restored.
All hands voted Queequeg a noble trump;the captain begged his pardon.
From that hour I clove to Queequeglike a barnacle; yea, till poor Queequeg took his last long dive.
Was there ever such unconsciousness? He did not seem to think thathe at all deserved a medal from the Humane and Magnanimous Societies.
He only asked for water--fresh water--something to wipe the brineoff; that done, he put on dry clothes, lighted his pipe, and leaningagainst the bulwarks, and mildly eyeing those around him, seemed tobe saying to himself--"It's a mutual, joint-stock world, in allmeridians.
We cannibals must help these Christians.
"Nantucket.
Nothing more happened on the passage worthy the mentioning; so, aftera fine run, we safely arrived in Nantucket.
Nantucket! Take out your map and look at it.
See what a real cornerof the world it occupies; how it stands there, away off shore, morelonely than the Eddystone lighthouse.
Look at it--a mere hillock,and elbow of sand; all beach, without a background.
There is moresand there than you would use in twenty years as a substitute forblotting paper.
Some gamesome wights will tell you that they have toplant weeds there, they don't grow naturally; that they import Canadathistles; that they have to send beyond seas for a spile to stop aleak in an oil cask; that pieces of wood in Nantucket are carriedabout like bits of the true cross in Rome; that people there planttoadstools before their houses, to get under the shade in summertime; that one blade of grass makes an oasis, three blades in a day'swalk a prairie; that they wear quicksand shoes, something likeLaplander snow-shoes; that they are so shut up, belted about, everyway inclosed, surrounded, and made an utter island of by the ocean,that to their very chairs and tables small clams will sometimes befound adhering, as to the backs of sea turtles.
But theseextravaganzas only show that Nantucket is no Illinois.
Look now at the wondrous traditional story of how this island wassettled by the red-men.
Thus goes the legend.
In olden times aneagle swooped down upon the New England coast, and carried off aninfant Indian in his talons.
With loud lament the parents saw theirchild borne out of sight over the wide waters.
They resolved tofollow in the same direction.
Setting out in their canoes, after aperilous passage they discovered the island, and there they found anempty ivory casket,--the poor little Indian's skeleton.
What wonder, then, that these Nantucketers, born on a beach, shouldtake to the sea for a livelihood! They first caught crabs andquohogs in the sand; grown bolder, they waded out with nets formackerel; more experienced, they pushed off in boats and capturedcod; and at last, launching a navy of great ships on the sea,explored this watery world; put an incessant belt ofcircumnavigations round it; peeped in at Behring's Straits; and inall seasons and all oceans declared everlasting war with themightiest animated mass that has survived the flood; most monstrousand most mountainous! That Himmalehan, salt-sea Mastodon, clothedwith such portentousness of unconscious power, that his very panicsare more to be dreaded than his most fearless and malicious assaults!And thus have these naked Nantucketers, these sea hermits, issuingfrom their ant-hill in the sea, overrun and conquered the wateryworld like so many Alexanders; parcelling out among them theAtlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans, as the three pirate powers didPoland.
Let America add Mexico to Texas, and pile Cuba upon Canada;let the English overswarm all India, and hang out their blazingbanner from the sun; two thirds of this terraqueous globe are theNantucketer's.
For the sea is his; he owns it, as Emperors ownempires; other seamen having but a right of way through it.
Merchantships are but extension bridges; armed ones but floating forts; evenpirates and privateers, though following the sea as highwaymen theroad, they but plunder other ships, other fragments of the land likethemselves, without seeking to draw their living from the bottomlessdeep itself.
The Nantucketer, he alone resides and riots on the sea;he alone, in Bible language, goes down to it in ships; to and froploughing it as his own special plantation.
THERE is his home; THERElies his business, which a Noah's flood would not interrupt, thoughit overwhelmed all the millions in China.
He lives on the sea, asprairie cocks in the prairie; he hides among the waves, he climbsthem as chamois hunters climb the Alps.
For years he knows not theland; so that when he comes to it at last, it smells like anotherworld, more strangely than the moon would to an Earthsman.
With thelandless gull, that at sunset folds her wings and is rocked to sleepbetween billows; so at nightfall, the Nantucketer, out of sight ofland, furls his sails, and lays him to his rest, while under his verypillow rush herds of walruses and whales.
Chowder.
It was quite late in the evening when the little Moss came snugly toanchor, and Queequeg and I went ashore; so we could attend to nobusiness that day, at least none but a supper and a bed.
Thelandlord of the Spouter-Inn had recommended us to his cousin HoseaHussey of the Try Pots, whom he asserted to be the proprietor of oneof the best kept hotels in all Nantucket, and moreover he had assuredus that Cousin Hosea, as he called him, was famous for his chowders.
In short, he plainly hinted that we could not possibly do better thantry pot-luck at the Try Pots.
But the directions he had given usabout keeping a yellow warehouse on our starboard hand till we openeda white church to the larboard, and then keeping that on the larboardhand till we made a corner three points to the starboard, and thatdone, then ask the first man we met where the place was: thesecrooked directions of his very much puzzled us at first, especiallyas, at the outset, Queequeg insisted that the yellow warehouse--ourfirst point of departure--must be left on the larboard hand, whereasI had understood Peter Coffin to say it was on the starboard.
However, by dint of beating about a little in the dark, and now andthen knocking up a peaceable inhabitant to inquire the way, we atlast came to something which there was no mistaking.
Two enormous wooden pots painted black, and suspended by asses' ears,swung from the cross-trees of an old top-mast, planted in front of anold doorway.
The horns of the cross-trees were sawed off on theother side, so that this old top-mast looked not a little like agallows.
Perhaps I was over sensitive to such impressions at thetime, but I could not help staring at this gallows with a vaguemisgiving.
A sort of crick was in my neck as I gazed up to the tworemaining horns; yes, TWO of them, one for Queequeg, and one for me.
It's ominous, thinks I.
A Coffin my Innkeeper upon landing in myfirst whaling port; tombstones staring at me in the whalemen'schapel; and here a gallows! and a pair of prodigious black pots too!Are these last throwing out oblique hints touching Tophet?I was called from these reflections by the sight of a freckled womanwith yellow hair and a yellow gown, standing in the porch of the inn,under a dull red lamp swinging there, that looked much like aninjured eye, and carrying on a brisk scolding with a man in a purplewoollen shirt.
"Get along with ye," said she to the man, "or I'll be combing ye!""Come on, Queequeg," said I, "all right.
There's Mrs.
Hussey.
"And so it turned out; Mr.
Hosea Hussey being from home, but leavingMrs.
Hussey entirely competent to attend to all his affairs.
Uponmaking known our desires for a supper and a bed, Mrs.
Hussey,postponing further scolding for the present, ushered us into a littleroom, and seating us at a table spread with the relics of a recentlyconcluded repast, turned round to us and said--"Clam or Cod?""What's that about Cods, ma'am?" said I, with much politeness.
"Clam or Cod?" she repeated.
"A clam for supper? a cold clam; is THAT what you mean, Mrs.
Hussey?"says I, "but that's a rather cold and clammy reception in the wintertime, ain't it, Mrs.
Hussey?"But being in a great hurry to resume scolding the man in the purpleShirt, who was waiting for it in the entry, and seeming to hearnothing but the word "clam," Mrs.
Hussey hurried towards an open doorleading to the kitchen, and bawling out "clam for two," disappeared.
"Queequeg," said I, "do you think that we can make out a supper forus both on one clam?"However, a warm savory steam from the kitchen served to belie theapparently cheerless prospect before us.
But when that smokingchowder came in, the mystery was delightfully explained.
Oh, sweetfriends! hearken to me.
It was made of small juicy clams, scarcelybigger than hazel nuts, mixed with pounded ship biscuit, and saltedpork cut up into little flakes; the whole enriched with butter, andplentifully seasoned with pepper and salt.
Our appetites beingsharpened by the frosty voyage, and in particular, Queequeg seeinghis favourite fishing food before him, and the chowder beingsurpassingly excellent, we despatched it with great expedition: whenleaning back a moment and bethinking me of Mrs.
Hussey's clam and codannouncement, I thought I would try a little experiment.
Stepping tothe kitchen door, I uttered the word "cod" with great emphasis, andresumed my seat.
In a few moments the savoury steam came forthagain, but with a different flavor, and in good time a finecod-chowder was placed before us.
We resumed business; and while plying our spoons in the bowl, thinksI to myself, I wonder now if this here has any effect on the head?What's that stultifying saying about chowder-headed people? "Butlook, Queequeg, ain't that a live eel in your bowl? Where's yourharpoon?"Fishiest of all fishy places was the Try Pots, which well deservedits name; for the pots there were always boiling chowders.
Chowderfor breakfast, and chowder for dinner, and chowder for supper, tillyou began to look for fish-bones coming through your clothes.
Thearea before the house was paved with clam-shells.
Mrs.
Hussey wore apolished necklace of codfish vertebra; and Hosea Hussey had hisaccount books bound in superior old shark-skin.
There was a fishyflavor to the milk, too, which I could not at all account for, tillone morning happening to take a stroll along the beach among somefishermen's boats, I saw Hosea's brindled cow feeding on fishremnants, and marching along the sand with each foot in a cod'sdecapitated head, looking very slip-shod, I assure ye.
Supper concluded, we received a lamp, and directions from Mrs.
Husseyconcerning the nearest way to bed; but, as Queequeg was about toprecede me up the stairs, the lady reached forth her arm, anddemanded his harpoon; she allowed no harpoon in her chambers.
"Whynot? said I; "every true whaleman sleeps with his harpoon--but whynot?" "Because it's dangerous," says she.
"Ever since young Stiggscoming from that unfort'nt v'y'ge of his, when he was gone four yearsand a half, with only three barrels of ILE, was found dead in myfirst floor back, with his harpoon in his side; ever since then Iallow no boarders to take sich dangerous weepons in their rooms atnight.
So, Mr.
Queequeg" (for she had learned his name), "I willjust take this here iron, and keep it for you till morning.
But thechowder; clam or cod to-morrow for breakfast, men?""Both," says I; "and let's have a couple of smoked herring by way ofvariety.
"The Ship.
In bed we concocted our plans for the morrow.
But to my surprise andno small concern, Queequeg now gave me to understand, that he hadbeen diligently consulting Yojo--the name of his black littlegod--and Yojo had told him two or three times over, and stronglyinsisted upon it everyway, that instead of our going together amongthe whaling-fleet in harbor, and in concert selecting our craft;instead of this, I say, Yojo earnestly enjoined that the selection ofthe ship should rest wholly with me, inasmuch as Yojo purposedbefriending us; and, in order to do so, had already pitched upon avessel, which, if left to myself, I, Ishmael, should infallibly lightupon, for all the world as though it had turned out by chance; and inthat vessel I must immediately ship myself, for the presentirrespective of Queequeg.
I have forgotten to mention that, in many things, Queequeg placedgreat confidence in the excellence of Yojo's judgment and surprisingforecast of things; and cherished Yojo with considerable esteem, as arather good sort of god, who perhaps meant well enough upon thewhole, but in all cases did not succeed in his benevolent designs.
Now, this plan of Queequeg's, or rather Yojo's, touching theselection of our craft; I did not like that plan at all.
I had not alittle relied upon Queequeg's sagacity to point out the whaler bestfitted to carry us and our fortunes securely.
But as all myremonstrances produced no effect upon Queequeg, I was obliged toacquiesce; and accordingly prepared to set about this business with adetermined rushing sort of energy and vigor, that should quicklysettle that trifling little affair.
Next morning early, leavingQueequeg shut up with Yojo in our little bedroom--for it seemed thatit was some sort of Lent or Ramadan, or day of fasting, humiliation,and prayer with Queequeg and Yojo that day; HOW it was I never couldfind out, for, though I applied myself to it several times, I nevercould master his liturgies and XXXIX Articles--leaving Queequeg,then, fasting on his tomahawk pipe, and Yojo warming himself at hissacrificial fire of shavings, I sallied out among the shipping.
After much prolonged sauntering and many random inquiries, I learntthat there were three ships up for three-years' voyages--TheDevil-dam, the Tit-bit, and the Pequod.
DEVIL-DAM, I do not knowthe origin of; TIT-BIT is obvious; PEQUOD, you will no doubtremember, was the name of a celebrated tribe of MassachusettsIndians; now extinct as the ancient Medes.
I peered and pryed aboutthe Devil-dam; from her, hopped over to the Tit-bit; and finally,going on board the Pequod, looked around her for a moment, and thendecided that this was the very ship for us.
You may have seen many a quaint craft in your day, for aught Iknow;--square-toed luggers; mountainous Japanese junks; butter-boxgalliots, and what not; but take my word for it, you never saw such arare old craft as this same rare old Pequod.
She was a ship of theold school, rather small if anything; with an old-fashionedclaw-footed look about her.
Long seasoned and weather-stained in thetyphoons and calms of all four oceans, her old hull's complexion wasdarkened like a French grenadier's, who has alike fought in Egypt andSiberia.
Her venerable bows looked bearded.
Her masts--cutsomewhere on the coast of Japan, where her original ones were lostoverboard in a gale--her masts stood stiffly up like the spines ofthe three old kings of Cologne.
Her ancient decks were worn andwrinkled, like the pilgrim-worshipped flag-stone in CanterburyCathedral where Becket bled.
But to all these her old antiquities,were added new and marvellous features, pertaining to the wildbusiness that for more than half a century she had followed.
OldCaptain Peleg, many years her chief-mate, before he commanded anothervessel of his own, and now a retired seaman, and one of the principalowners of the Pequod,--this old Peleg, during the term of hischief-mateship, had built upon her original grotesqueness, and inlaidit, all over, with a quaintness both of material and device,unmatched by anything except it be Thorkill-Hake's carved buckler orbedstead.
She was apparelled like any barbaric Ethiopian emperor,his neck heavy with pendants of polished ivory.
She was a thing oftrophies.
A cannibal of a craft, tricking herself forth in thechased bones of her enemies.
All round, her unpanelled, openbulwarks were garnished like one continuous jaw, with the long sharpteeth of the sperm whale, inserted there for pins, to fasten her oldhempen thews and tendons to.
Those thews ran not through base blocksof land wood, but deftly travelled over sheaves of sea-ivory.
Scorning a turnstile wheel at her reverend helm, she sported there atiller; and that tiller was in one mass, curiously carved from thelong narrow lower jaw of her hereditary foe.
The helmsman whosteered by that tiller in a tempest, felt like the Tartar, when heholds back his fiery steed by clutching its jaw.
A noble craft, butsomehow a most melancholy! All noble things are touched with that.
Now when I looked about the quarter-deck, for some one havingauthority, in order to propose myself as a candidate for the voyage,at first I saw nobody; but I could not well overlook a strange sortof tent, or rather wigwam, pitched a little behind the main-mast.
Itseemed only a temporary erection used in port.
It was of a conicalshape, some ten feet high; consisting of the long, huge slabs oflimber black bone taken from the middle and highest part of the jawsof the right-whale.
Planted with their broad ends on the deck, acircle of these slabs laced together, mutually sloped towards eachother, and at the apex united in a tufted point, where the loosehairy fibres waved to and fro like the top-knot on some oldPottowottamie Sachem's head.
A triangular opening faced towards thebows of the ship, so that the insider commanded a complete viewforward.
And half concealed in this queer tenement, I at length found one whoby his aspect seemed to have authority; and who, it being noon, andthe ship's work suspended, was now enjoying respite from the burdenof command.
He was seated on an old-fashioned oaken chair, wrigglingall over with curious carving; and the bottom of which was formed ofa stout interlacing of the same elastic stuff of which the wigwam wasconstructed.
There was nothing so very particular, perhaps, about the appearanceof the elderly man I saw; he was brown and brawny, like most oldseamen, and heavily rolled up in blue pilot-cloth, cut in the Quakerstyle; only there was a fine and almost microscopic net-work of theminutest wrinkles interlacing round his eyes, which must have arisenfrom his continual sailings in many hard gales, and always looking towindward;--for this causes the muscles about the eyes to becomepursed together.
Such eye-wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl.
"Is this the Captain of the Pequod?" said I, advancing to the door ofthe tent.
"Supposing it be the captain of the Pequod, what dost thou want ofhim?" he demanded.
"I was thinking of shipping.
""Thou wast, wast thou? I see thou art no Nantucketer--ever been ina stove boat?""No, Sir, I never have.
""Dost know nothing at all about whaling, I dare say--eh?"Nothing, Sir; but I have no doubt I shall soon learn.
I've beenseveral voyages in the merchant service, and I think that--""Merchant service be damned.
Talk not that lingo to me.
Dost seethat leg?--I'll take that leg away from thy stern, if ever thoutalkest of the marchant service to me again.
Marchant serviceindeed! I suppose now ye feel considerable proud of having served inthose marchant ships.
But flukes! man, what makes thee want to go awhaling, eh?--it looks a little suspicious, don't it, eh?--Hast notbeen a pirate, hast thou?--Didst not rob thy last Captain, didstthou?--Dost not think of murdering the officers when thou gettest tosea?"I protested my innocence of these things.
I saw that under the maskof these half humorous innuendoes, this old seaman, as an insulatedQuakerish Nantucketer, was full of his insular prejudices, and ratherdistrustful of all aliens, unless they hailed from Cape Cod or theVineyard.
"But what takes thee a-whaling? I want to know that before I thinkof shipping ye.
""Well, sir, I want to see what whaling is.
I want to see the world.
""Want to see what whaling is, eh? Have ye clapped eye on CaptainAhab?""Who is Captain Ahab, sir?""Aye, aye, I thought so.
Captain Ahab is the Captain of this ship.
""I am mistaken then.
I thought I was speaking to the Captainhimself.
""Thou art speaking to Captain Peleg--that's who ye are speaking to,young man.
It belongs to me and Captain Bildad to see the Pequodfitted out for the voyage, and supplied with all her needs, includingcrew.
We are part owners and agents.
But as I was going to say, ifthou wantest to know what whaling is, as thou tellest ye do, I canput ye in a way of finding it out before ye bind yourself to it, pastbacking out.
Clap eye on Captain Ahab, young man, and thou wilt findthat he has only one leg.
""What do you mean, sir? Was the other one lost by a whale?""Lost by a whale! Young man, come nearer to me: it was devoured,chewed up, crunched by the monstrousest parmacetty that ever chippeda boat!--ah, ah!"I was a little alarmed by his energy, perhaps also a little touchedat the hearty grief in his concluding exclamation, but said as calmlyas I could, "What you say is no doubt true enough, sir; but how couldI know there was any peculiar ferocity in that particular whale,though indeed I might have inferred as much from the simple fact ofthe accident.
""Look ye now, young man, thy lungs are a sort of soft, d'ye see; thoudost not talk shark a bit.
SURE, ye've been to sea before now; sureof that?""Sir," said I, "I thought I told you that I had been four voyages inthe merchant--""Hard down out of that! Mind what I said about the marchantservice--don't aggravate me--I won't have it.
But let us understandeach other.
I have given thee a hint about what whaling is; do yeyet feel inclined for it?""I do, sir.
""Very good.
Now, art thou the man to pitch a harpoon down a livewhale's throat, and then jump after it? Answer, quick!""I am, sir, if it should be positively indispensable to do so; not tobe got rid of, that is; which I don't take to be the fact.
""Good again.
Now then, thou not only wantest to go a-whaling, tofind out by experience what whaling is, but ye also want to go inorder to see the world? Was not that what ye said? I thought so.
Well then, just step forward there, and take a peep over theweather-bow, and then back to me and tell me what ye see there.
"For a moment I stood a little puzzled by this curious request, notknowing exactly how to take it, whether humorously or in earnest.
But concentrating all his crow's feet into one scowl, Captain Pelegstarted me on the errand.
Going forward and glancing over the weather bow, I perceived that theship swinging to her anchor with the flood-tide, was now obliquelypointing towards the open ocean.
The prospect was unlimited, butexceedingly monotonous and forbidding; not the slightest variety thatI could see.
"Well, what's the report?" said Peleg when I came back; "what did yesee?""Not much," I replied--"nothing but water; considerable horizonthough, and there's a squall coming up, I think.
""Well, what does thou think then of seeing the world? Do ye wish togo round Cape Horn to see any more of it, eh? Can't ye see the worldwhere you stand?"I was a little staggered, but go a-whaling I must, and I would; andthe Pequod was as good a ship as any--I thought the best--and allthis I now repeated to Peleg.
Seeing me so determined, he expressedhis willingness to ship me.
"And thou mayest as well sign the papers right off," he added--"comealong with ye.
" And so saying, he led the way below deck into thecabin.
Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon andsurprising figure.
It turned out to be Captain Bildad, who alongwith Captain Peleg was one of the largest owners of the vessel; theother shares, as is sometimes the case in these ports, being held bya crowd of old annuitants; widows, fatherless children, and chancerywards; each owning about the value of a timber head, or a foot ofplank, or a nail or two in the ship.
People in Nantucket investtheir money in whaling vessels, the same way that you do yours inapproved state stocks bringing in good interest.
Now, Bildad, like Peleg, and indeed many other Nantucketers, was aQuaker, the island having been originally settled by that sect; andto this day its inhabitants in general retain in an uncommon measurethe peculiarities of the Quaker, only variously and anomalouslymodified by things altogether alien and heterogeneous.
For some ofthese same Quakers are the most sanguinary of all sailors andwhale-hunters.
They are fighting Quakers; they are Quakers with avengeance.
So that there are instances among them of men, who, named withScripture names--a singularly common fashion on the island--and inchildhood naturally imbibing the stately dramatic thee and thou ofthe Quaker idiom; still, from the audacious, daring, and boundlessadventure of their subsequent lives, strangely blend with theseunoutgrown peculiarities, a thousand bold dashes of character, notunworthy a Scandinavian sea-king, or a poetical Pagan Roman.
Andwhen these things unite in a man of greatly superior natural force,with a globular brain and a ponderous heart; who has also by thestillness and seclusion of many long night-watches in the remotestwaters, and beneath constellations never seen here at the north, beenled to think untraditionally and independently; receiving allnature's sweet or savage impressions fresh from her own virginvoluntary and confiding breast, and thereby chiefly, but with somehelp from accidental advantages, to learn a bold and nervous loftylanguage--that man makes one in a whole nation's census--a mightypageant creature, formed for noble tragedies.
Nor will it at alldetract from him, dramatically regarded, if either by birth or othercircumstances, he have what seems a half wilful overruling morbidnessat the bottom of his nature.
For all men tragically great are madeso through a certain morbidness.
Be sure of this, O young ambition,all mortal greatness is but disease.
But, as yet we have not to dowith such an one, but with quite another; and still a man, who, ifindeed peculiar, it only results again from another phase of theQuaker, modified by individual circumstances.
Like Captain Peleg, Captain Bildad was a well-to-do, retiredwhaleman.
But unlike Captain Peleg--who cared not a rush for whatare called serious things, and indeed deemed those self-same seriousthings the veriest of all trifles--Captain Bildad had not only beenoriginally educated according to the strictest sect of NantucketQuakerism, but all his subsequent ocean life, and the sight of manyunclad, lovely island creatures, round the Horn--all that had notmoved this native born Quaker one single jot, had not so much asaltered one angle of his vest.
Still, for all this immutableness,was there some lack of common consistency about worthy CaptainPeleg.
Though refusing, from conscientious scruples, to bear armsagainst land invaders, yet himself had illimitably invaded theAtlantic and Pacific; and though a sworn foe to human bloodshed, yethad he in his straight-bodied coat, spilled tuns upon tuns ofleviathan gore.
How now in the contemplative evening of his days,the pious Bildad reconciled these things in the reminiscence, I donot know; but it did not seem to concern him much, and very probablyhe had long since come to the sage and sensible conclusion that aman's religion is one thing, and this practical world quite another.
This world pays dividends.
Rising from a little cabin-boy in shortclothes of the drabbest drab, to a harpooneer in a broad shad-belliedwaistcoat; from that becoming boat-header, chief-mate, and captain,and finally a ship owner; Bildad, as I hinted before, had concludedhis adventurous career by wholly retiring from active life at thegoodly age of sixty, and dedicating his remaining days to the quietreceiving of his well-earned income.
Now, Bildad, I am sorry to say, had the reputation of being anincorrigible old hunks, and in his sea-going days, a bitter, hardtask-master.
They told me in Nantucket, though it certainly seems acurious story, that when he sailed the old Categut whaleman, hiscrew, upon arriving home, were mostly all carried ashore to thehospital, sore exhausted and worn out.
For a pious man, especiallyfor a Quaker, he was certainly rather hard-hearted, to say theleast.
He never used to swear, though, at his men, they said; butsomehow he got an inordinate quantity of cruel, unmitigated hard workout of them.
When Bildad was a chief-mate, to have his drab-colouredeye intently looking at you, made you feel completely nervous, tillyou could clutch something--a hammer or a marling-spike, and go towork like mad, at something or other, never mind what.
Indolence andidleness perished before him.
His own person was the exactembodiment of his utilitarian character.
On his long, gaunt body, hecarried no spare flesh, no superfluous beard, his chin having a soft,economical nap to it, like the worn nap of his broad-brimmed hat.
Such, then, was the person that I saw seated on the transom when Ifollowed Captain Peleg down into the cabin.
The space between thedecks was small; and there, bolt-upright, sat old Bildad, who alwayssat so, and never leaned, and this to save his coat tails.
Hisbroad-brim was placed beside him; his legs were stiffly crossed; hisdrab vesture was buttoned up to his chin; and spectacles on nose, heseemed absorbed in reading from a ponderous volume.
"Bildad," cried Captain Peleg, "at it again, Bildad, eh? Ye havebeen studying those Scriptures, now, for the last thirty years, to mycertain knowledge.
How far ye got, Bildad?"As if long habituated to such profane talk from his old shipmate,Bildad, without noticing his present irreverence, quietly looked up,and seeing me, glanced again inquiringly towards Peleg.
"He says he's our man, Bildad," said Peleg, "he wants to ship.
""Dost thee?" said Bildad, in a hollow tone, and turning round to me.
"I dost," said I unconsciously, he was so intense a Quaker.
"What do ye think of him, Bildad?" said Peleg.
"He'll do," said Bildad, eyeing me, and then went on spelling away athis book in a mumbling tone quite audible.
I thought him the queerest old Quaker I ever saw, especially asPeleg, his friend and old shipmate, seemed such a blusterer.
But Isaid nothing, only looking round me sharply.
Peleg now threw open achest, and drawing forth the ship's articles, placed pen and inkbefore him, and seated himself at a little table.
I began to thinkit was high time to settle with myself at what terms I would bewilling to engage for the voyage.
I was already aware that in thewhaling business they paid no wages; but all hands, including thecaptain, received certain shares of the profits called lays, and thatthese lays were proportioned to the degree of importance pertainingto the respective duties of the ship's company.
I was also awarethat being a green hand at whaling, my own lay would not be verylarge; but considering that I was used to the sea, could steer aship, splice a rope, and all that, I made no doubt that from all Ihad heard I should be offered at least the 275th lay--that is, the275th part of the clear net proceeds of the voyage, whatever thatmight eventually amount to.
And though the 275th lay was what theycall a rather LONG LAY, yet it was better than nothing; and if we hada lucky voyage, might pretty nearly pay for the clothing I would wearout on it, not to speak of my three years' beef and board, for whichI would not have to pay one stiver.
It might be thought that this was a poor way to accumulate a princelyfortune--and so it was, a very poor way indeed.
But I am one ofthose that never take on about princely fortunes, and am quitecontent if the world is ready to board and lodge me, while I amputting up at this grim sign of the Thunder Cloud.
Upon the whole, Ithought that the 275th lay would be about the fair thing, but would nothave been surprised had I been offered the 200th, considering I wasof a broad-shouldered make.
But one thing, nevertheless, that made me a little distrustful aboutreceiving a generous share of the profits was this: Ashore, I hadheard something of both Captain Peleg and his unaccountable old cronyBildad; how that they being the principal proprietors of the Pequod,therefore the other and more inconsiderable and scattered owners,left nearly the whole management of the ship's affairs to these two.
And I did not know but what the stingy old Bildad might have a mightydeal to say about shipping hands, especially as I now found him onboard the Pequod, quite at home there in the cabin, and reading hisBible as if at his own fireside.
Now while Peleg was vainly tryingto mend a pen with his jack-knife, old Bildad, to my no smallsurprise, considering that he was such an interested party in theseproceedings; Bildad never heeded us, but went on mumbling to himselfout of his book, "LAY not up for yourselves treasures upon earth,where moth--""Well, Captain Bildad," interrupted Peleg, "what d'ye say, what layshall we give this young man?""Thou knowest best," was the sepulchral reply, "the seven hundred andseventy-seventh wouldn't be too much, would it?--'where moth and rustdo corrupt, but LAY--'"LAY, indeed, thought I, and such a lay! the seven hundred andseventy-seventh! Well, old Bildad, you are determined that I, forone, shall not LAY up many LAYS here below, where moth and rust docorrupt.
It was an exceedingly LONG LAY that, indeed; and thoughfrom the magnitude of the figure it might at first deceive alandsman, yet the slightest consideration will show that though sevenhundred and seventy-seven is a pretty large number, yet, when youcome to make a TEENTH of it, you will then see, I say, that the sevenhundred and seventy-seventh part of a farthing is a good deal lessthan seven hundred and seventy-seven gold doubloons; and so I thoughtat the time.
"Why, blast your eyes, Bildad," cried Peleg, "thou dost not want toswindle this young man! he must have more than that.
""Seven hundred and seventy-seventh," again said Bildad, withoutlifting his eyes; and then went on mumbling--"for where your treasureis, there will your heart be also.
""I am going to put him down for the three hundredth," said Peleg, "doye hear that, Bildad! The three hundredth lay, I say.
"Bildad laid down his book, and turning solemnly towards him said,"Captain Peleg, thou hast a generous heart; but thou must considerthe duty thou owest to the other owners of this ship--widows andorphans, many of them--and that if we too abundantly reward thelabors of this young man, we may be taking the bread from thosewidows and those orphans.
The seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay,Captain Peleg.
""Thou Bildad!" roared Peleg, starting up and clattering about thecabin.
"Blast ye, Captain Bildad, if I had followed thy advice inthese matters, I would afore now had a conscience to lug about thatwould be heavy enough to founder the largest ship that ever sailedround Cape Horn.
""Captain Peleg," said Bildad steadily, "thy conscience may be drawingten inches of water, or ten fathoms, I can't tell; but as thou artstill an impenitent man, Captain Peleg, I greatly fear lest thyconscience be but a leaky one; and will in the end sink theefoundering down to the fiery pit, Captain Peleg.
""Fiery pit! fiery pit! ye insult me, man; past all natural bearing,ye insult me.
It's an all-fired outrage to tell any human creaturethat he's bound to hell.
Flukes and flames! Bildad, say that againto me, and start my soul-bolts, but I'll--I'll--yes, I'll swallow alive goat with all his hair and horns on.
Out of the cabin, yecanting, drab-coloured son of a wooden gun--a straight wake with ye!"As he thundered out this he made a rush at Bildad, but with amarvellous oblique, sliding celerity, Bildad for that time eludedhim.
Alarmed at this terrible outburst between the two principal andresponsible owners of the ship, and feeling half a mind to give upall idea of sailing in a vessel so questionably owned and temporarilycommanded, I stepped aside from the door to give egress to Bildad,who, I made no doubt, was all eagerness to vanish from before theawakened wrath of Peleg.
But to my astonishment, he sat down againon the transom very quietly, and seemed to have not the slightestintention of withdrawing.
He seemed quite used to impenitent Pelegand his ways.
As for Peleg, after letting off his rage as he had,there seemed no more left in him, and he, too, sat down like a lamb,though he twitched a little as if still nervously agitated.
"Whew!"he whistled at last--"the squall's gone off to leeward, I think.
Bildad, thou used to be good at sharpening a lance, mend that pen,will ye.
My jack-knife here needs the grindstone.
That's he; thankye, Bildad.
Now then, my young man, Ishmael's thy name, didn't yesay? Well then, down ye go here, Ishmael, for the three hundredthlay.
""Captain Peleg," said I, "I have a friend with me who wants to shiptoo--shall I bring him down to-morrow?""To be sure," said Peleg.
"Fetch him along, and we'll look at him.
""What lay does he want?" groaned Bildad, glancing up from the bookin which he had again been burying himself.
"Oh! never thee mind about that, Bildad," said Peleg.
"Has he everwhaled it any?" turning to me.
"Killed more whales than I can count, Captain Peleg.
""Well, bring him along then.
"And, after signing the papers, off I went; nothing doubting but thatI had done a good morning's work, and that the Pequod was theidentical ship that Yojo had provided to carry Queequeg and me roundthe Cape.
But I had not proceeded far, when I began to bethink me that theCaptain with whom I was to sail yet remained unseen by me; though,indeed, in many cases, a whale-ship will be completely fitted out,and receive all her crew on board, ere the captain makes himselfvisible by arriving to take command; for sometimes these voyages areso prolonged, and the shore intervals at home so exceedingly brief,that if the captain have a family, or any absorbing concernment ofthat sort, he does not trouble himself much about his ship in port,but leaves her to the owners till all is ready for sea.
However, itis always as well to have a look at him before irrevocably committingyourself into his hands.
Turning back I accosted Captain Peleg,inquiring where Captain Ahab was to be found.
"And what dost thou want of Captain Ahab? It's all right enough;thou art shipped.
""Yes, but I should like to see him.
""But I don't think thou wilt be able to at present.
I don't knowexactly what's the matter with him; but he keeps close inside thehouse; a sort of sick, and yet he don't look so.
In fact, he ain'tsick; but no, he isn't well either.
Any how, young man, he won'talways see me, so I don't suppose he will thee.
He's a queer man,Captain Ahab--so some think--but a good one.
Oh, thou'lt like himwell enough; no fear, no fear.
He's a grand, ungodly, god-like man,Captain Ahab; doesn't speak much; but, when he does speak, then youmay well listen.
Mark ye, be forewarned; Ahab's above the common;Ahab's been in colleges, as well as 'mong the cannibals; been used todeeper wonders than the waves; fixed his fiery lance in mightier,stranger foes than whales.
His lance! aye, the keenest and the surestthat out of all our isle! Oh! he ain't Captain Bildad; no, and heain't Captain Peleg; HE'S AHAB, boy; and Ahab of old, thou knowest,was a crowned king!""And a very vile one.
When that wicked king was slain, the dogs, didthey not lick his blood?""Come hither to me--hither, hither," said Peleg, with a significancein his eye that almost startled me.
"Look ye, lad; never say that onboard the Pequod.
Never say it anywhere.
Captain Ahab did not namehimself.
'Twas a foolish, ignorant whim of his crazy, widowedmother, who died when he was only a twelvemonth old.
And yet the oldsquaw Tistig, at Gayhead, said that the name would somehow proveprophetic.
And, perhaps, other fools like her may tell thee thesame.
I wish to warn thee.
It's a lie.
I know Captain Ahab well;I've sailed with him as mate years ago; I know what he is--a goodman--not a pious, good man, like Bildad, but a swearing goodman--something like me--only there's a good deal more of him.
Aye,aye, I know that he was never very jolly; and I know that on thepassage home, he was a little out of his mind for a spell; but it wasthe sharp shooting pains in his bleeding stump that brought thatabout, as any one might see.
I know, too, that ever since he losthis leg last voyage by that accursed whale, he's been a kind ofmoody--desperate moody, and savage sometimes; but that will all passoff.
And once for all, let me tell thee and assure thee, young man,it's better to sail with a moody good captain than a laughing badone.
So good-bye to thee--and wrong not Captain Ahab, because hehappens to have a wicked name.
Besides, my boy, he has a wife--notthree voyages wedded--a sweet, resigned girl.
Think of that; by thatsweet girl that old man has a child: hold ye then there can be anyutter, hopeless harm in Ahab? No, no, my lad; stricken, blasted, ifhe be, Ahab has his humanities!"As I walked away, I was full of thoughtfulness; what had beenincidentally revealed to me of Captain Ahab, filled me with a certainwild vagueness of painfulness concerning him.
And somehow, at thetime, I felt a sympathy and a sorrow for him, but for I don't knowwhat, unless it was the cruel loss of his leg.
And yet I also felt astrange awe of him; but that sort of awe, which I cannot at alldescribe, was not exactly awe; I do not know what it was.
But I feltit; and it did not disincline me towards him; though I feltimpatience at what seemed like mystery in him, so imperfectly as hewas known to me then.
However, my thoughts were at length carried inother directions, so that for the present dark Ahab slipped my mind.
The Ramadan.
As Queequeg's Ramadan, or Fasting and Humiliation, was to continueall day, I did not choose to disturb him till towards night-fall; forI cherish the greatest respect towards everybody's religiousobligations, never mind how comical, and could not find it in myheart to undervalue even a congregation of ants worshipping atoad-stool; or those other creatures in certain parts of our earth,who with a degree of footmanism quite unprecedented in other planets,bow down before the torso of a deceased landed proprietor merely onaccount of the inordinate possessions yet owned and rented in hisname.
I say, we good Presbyterian Christians should be charitable in thesethings, and not fancy ourselves so vastly superior to other mortals,pagans and what not, because of their half-crazy conceits on thesesubjects.
There was Queequeg, now, certainly entertaining the mostabsurd notions about Yojo and his Ramadan;--but what of that?Queequeg thought he knew what he was about, I suppose; he seemed tobe content; and there let him rest.
All our arguing with him wouldnot avail; let him be, I say: and Heaven have mercy on usall--Presbyterians and Pagans alike--for we are all somehowdreadfully cracked about the head, and sadly need mending.
Towards evening, when I felt assured that all his performances andrituals must be over, I went up to his room and knocked at the door;but no answer.
I tried to open it, but it was fastened inside.
"Queequeg," said I softly through the key-hole:--all silent.
"I say,Queequeg! why don't you speak? It's I--Ishmael.
" But all remainedstill as before.
I began to grow alarmed.
I had allowed him suchabundant time; I thought he might have had an apoplectic fit.
Ilooked through the key-hole; but the door opening into an odd cornerof the room, the key-hole prospect was but a crooked and sinisterone.
I could only see part of the foot-board of the bed and a lineof the wall, but nothing more.
I was surprised to behold restingagainst the wall the wooden shaft of Queequeg's harpoon, which thelandlady the evening previous had taken from him, before our mountingto the chamber.
That's strange, thought I; but at any rate, sincethe harpoon stands yonder, and he seldom or never goes abroad withoutit, therefore he must be inside here, and no possible mistake.
"Queequeg!--Queequeg!"--all still.
Something must have happened.
Apoplexy! I tried to burst open the door; but it stubbornlyresisted.
Running down stairs, I quickly stated my suspicions to thefirst person I met--the chamber-maid.
"La! la!" she cried, "Ithought something must be the matter.
I went to make the bed afterbreakfast, and the door was locked; and not a mouse to be heard; andit's been just so silent ever since.
But I thought, may be, you hadboth gone off and locked your baggage in for safe keeping.
La! la,ma'am!--Mistress! murder! Mrs.
Hussey! apoplexy!"--and with thesecries, she ran towards the kitchen, I following.
Mrs.
Hussey soon appeared, with a mustard-pot in one hand and avinegar-cruet in the other, having just broken away from theoccupation of attending to the castors, and scolding her little blackboy meantime.
"Wood-house!" cried I, "which way to it? Run for God's sake, andfetch something to pry open the door--the axe!--the axe! he's had astroke; depend upon it!"--and so saying I was unmethodically rushingup stairs again empty-handed, when Mrs.
Hussey interposed themustard-pot and vinegar-cruet, and the entire castor of hercountenance.
"What's the matter with you, young man?""Get the axe! For God's sake, run for the doctor, some one, while Ipry it open!""Look here," said the landlady, quickly putting down thevinegar-cruet, so as to have one hand free; "look here; are youtalking about prying open any of my doors?"--and with that she seizedmy arm.
"What's the matter with you? What's the matter with you,shipmate?"In as calm, but rapid a manner as possible, I gave her to understandthe whole case.
Unconsciously clapping the vinegar-cruet to one sideof her nose, she ruminated for an instant; then exclaimed--"No! Ihaven't seen it since I put it there.
" Running to a little closetunder the landing of the stairs, she glanced in, and returning, toldme that Queequeg's harpoon was missing.
"He's killed himself," shecried.
"It's unfort'nate Stiggs done over again there goes anothercounterpane--God pity his poor mother!--it will be the ruin of myhouse.
Has the poor lad a sister? Where's that girl?--there, Betty,go to Snarles the Painter, and tell him to paint me a sign, with--"nosuicides permitted here, and no smoking in the parlor;"--might aswell kill both birds at once.
Kill? The Lord be merciful to hisghost! What's that noise there? You, young man, avast there!"And running up after me, she caught me as I was again trying to forceopen the door.
"I don't allow it; I won't have my premises spoiled.
Go for thelocksmith, there's one about a mile from here.
But avast!" puttingher hand in her side-pocket, "here's a key that'll fit, I guess;let's see.
" And with that, she turned it in the lock; but, alas!Queequeg's supplemental bolt remained unwithdrawn within.
"Have to burst it open," said I, and was running down the entry alittle, for a good start, when the landlady caught at me, againvowing I should not break down her premises; but I tore from her, andwith a sudden bodily rush dashed myself full against the mark.
With a prodigious noise the door flew open, and the knob slammingagainst the wall, sent the plaster to the ceiling; and there, goodheavens! there sat Queequeg, altogether cool and self-collected;right in the middle of the room; squatting on his hams, and holdingYojo on top of his head.
He looked neither one way nor the otherway, but sat like a carved image with scarce a sign of active life.
"Queequeg," said I, going up to him, "Queequeg, what's the matterwith you?""He hain't been a sittin' so all day, has he?" said the landlady.
But all we said, not a word could we drag out of him; I almost feltlike pushing him over, so as to change his position, for it wasalmost intolerable, it seemed so painfully and unnaturallyconstrained; especially, as in all probability he had been sitting sofor upwards of eight or ten hours, going too without his regularmeals.
"Mrs.
Hussey," said I, "he's ALIVE at all events; so leave us, if youplease, and I will see to this strange affair myself.
"Closing the door upon the landlady, I endeavored to prevail uponQueequeg to take a chair; but in vain.
There he sat; and all hecould do--for all my polite arts and blandishments--he would not movea peg, nor say a single word, nor even look at me, nor notice mypresence in the slightest way.
I wonder, thought I, if this can possibly be a part of his Ramadan;do they fast on their hams that way in his native island.
It must beso; yes, it's part of his creed, I suppose; well, then, let himrest; he'll get up sooner or later, no doubt.
It can't last forever, thank God, and his Ramadan only comes once a year; and I don'tbelieve it's very punctual then.
I went down to supper.
After sitting a long time listening to thelong stories of some sailors who had just come from a plum-puddingvoyage, as they called it (that is, a short whaling-voyage in aschooner or brig, confined to the north of the line, in the AtlanticOcean only); after listening to these plum-puddingers till nearlyeleven o'clock, I went up stairs to go to bed, feeling quite sure bythis time Queequeg must certainly have brought his Ramadan to atermination.
But no; there he was just where I had left him; he hadnot stirred an inch.
I began to grow vexed with him; it seemed sodownright senseless and insane to be sitting there all day and halfthe night on his hams in a cold room, holding a piece of wood on hishead.
"For heaven's sake, Queequeg, get up and shake yourself; get up andhave some supper.
You'll starve; you'll kill yourself, Queequeg.
"But not a word did he reply.
Despairing of him, therefore, I determined to go to bed and to sleep;and no doubt, before a great while, he would follow me.
But previousto turning in, I took my heavy bearskin jacket, and threw it overhim, as it promised to be a very cold night; and he had nothing buthis ordinary round jacket on.
For some time, do all I would, I couldnot get into the faintest doze.
I had blown out the candle; and themere thought of Queequeg--not four feet off--sitting there in thatuneasy position, stark alone in the cold and dark; this made mereally wretched.
Think of it; sleeping all night in the same roomwith a wide awake pagan on his hams in this dreary, unaccountableRamadan!But somehow I dropped off at last, and knew nothing more till breakof day; when, looking over the bedside, there squatted Queequeg, asif he had been screwed down to the floor.
But as soon as the firstglimpse of sun entered the window, up he got, with stiff and gratingjoints, but with a cheerful look; limped towards me where I lay;pressed his forehead again against mine; and said his Ramadan wasover.
Now, as I before hinted, I have no objection to any person'sreligion, be it what it may, so long as that person does not kill orinsult any other person, because that other person don't believe italso.
But when a man's religion becomes really frantic; when it is apositive torment to him; and, in fine, makes this earth of ours anuncomfortable inn to lodge in; then I think it high time to take thatindividual aside and argue the point with him.
And just so I now did with Queequeg.
"Queequeg," said I, "get intobed now, and lie and listen to me.
" I then went on, beginning withthe rise and progress of the primitive religions, and coming down tothe various religions of the present time, during which time Ilabored to show Queequeg that all these Lents, Ramadans, andprolonged ham-squattings in cold, cheerless rooms were starknonsense; bad for the health; useless for the soul; opposed, inshort, to the obvious laws of Hygiene and common sense.
I told him,too, that he being in other things such an extremely sensible andsagacious savage, it pained me, very badly pained me, to see him nowso deplorably foolish about this ridiculous Ramadan of his.
Besides,argued I, fasting makes the body cave in; hence the spirit caves in;and all thoughts born of a fast must necessarily be half-starved.
This is the reason why most dyspeptic religionists cherish suchmelancholy notions about their hereafters.
In one word, Queequeg,said I, rather digressively; hell is an idea first born on anundigested apple-dumpling; and since then perpetuated through thehereditary dyspepsias nurtured by Ramadans.
I then asked Queequeg whether he himself was ever troubled withdyspepsia; expressing the idea very plainly, so that he could take itin.
He said no; only upon one memorable occasion.
It was after agreat feast given by his father the king, on the gaining of a greatbattle wherein fifty of the enemy had been killed by about twoo'clock in the afternoon, and all cooked and eaten that very evening.
"No more, Queequeg," said I, shuddering; "that will do;" for I knewthe inferences without his further hinting them.
I had seen a sailorwho had visited that very island, and he told me that it was thecustom, when a great battle had been gained there, to barbecue allthe slain in the yard or garden of the victor; and then, one by one,they were placed in great wooden trenchers, and garnished round likea pilau, with breadfruit and cocoanuts; and with some parsley intheir mouths, were sent round with the victor's compliments to allhis friends, just as though these presents were so many Christmasturkeys.
After all, I do not think that my remarks about religion made muchimpression upon Queequeg.
Because, in the first place, he somehowseemed dull of hearing on that important subject, unless consideredfrom his own point of view; and, in the second place, he did not morethan one third understand me, couch my ideas simply as I would; and,finally, he no doubt thought he knew a good deal more about the truereligion than I did.
He looked at me with a sort of condescendingconcern and compassion, as though he thought it a great pity thatsuch a sensible young man should be so hopelessly lost to evangelicalpagan piety.
At last we rose and dressed; and Queequeg, taking a prodigiouslyhearty breakfast of chowders of all sorts, so that the landladyshould not make much profit by reason of his Ramadan, we sallied outto board the Pequod, sauntering along, and picking our teeth withhalibut bones.
His Mark.
As we were walking down the end of the wharf towards the ship,Queequeg carrying his harpoon, Captain Peleg in his gruff voiceloudly hailed us from his wigwam, saying he had not suspected myfriend was a cannibal, and furthermore announcing that he let nocannibals on board that craft, unless they previously produced theirpapers.
"What do you mean by that, Captain Peleg?" said I, now jumping on thebulwarks, and leaving my comrade standing on the wharf.
"I mean," he replied, "he must show his papers.
""Yes," said Captain Bildad in his hollow voice, sticking his headfrom behind Peleg's, out of the wigwam.
"He must show that he'sconverted.
Son of darkness," he added, turning to Queequeg, "artthou at present in communion with any Christian church?""Why," said I, "he's a member of the first Congregational Church.
"Here be it said, that many tattooed savages sailing in Nantucketships at last come to be converted into the churches.
"First Congregational Church," cried Bildad, "what! that worships inDeacon Deuteronomy Coleman's meeting-house?" and so saying, takingout his spectacles, he rubbed them with his great yellow bandanahandkerchief, and putting them on very carefully, came out of thewigwam, and leaning stiffly over the bulwarks, took a good long lookat Queequeg.
"How long hath he been a member?" he then said, turning to me; "notvery long, I rather guess, young man.
""No," said Peleg, "and he hasn't been baptized right either, or itwould have washed some of that devil's blue off his face.
""Do tell, now," cried Bildad, "is this Philistine a regular member ofDeacon Deuteronomy's meeting? I never saw him going there, and Ipass it every Lord's day.
""I don't know anything about Deacon Deuteronomy or his meeting," saidI; "all I know is, that Queequeg here is a born member of the FirstCongregational Church.
He is a deacon himself, Queequeg is.
""Young man," said Bildad sternly, "thou art skylarking withme--explain thyself, thou young Hittite.
What church dost thee mean?answer me.
"Finding myself thus hard pushed, I replied.
"I mean, sir, the sameancient Catholic Church to which you and I, and Captain Peleg there,and Queequeg here, and all of us, and every mother's son and soul ofus belong; the great and everlasting First Congregation of this wholeworshipping world; we all belong to that; only some of us cherishsome queer crotchets no ways touching the grand belief; in THAT weall join hands.
""Splice, thou mean'st SPLICE hands," cried Peleg, drawing nearer.
"Young man, you'd better ship for a missionary, instead of afore-mast hand; I never heard a better sermon.
DeaconDeuteronomy--why Father Mapple himself couldn't beat it, and he'sreckoned something.
Come aboard, come aboard; never mind about thepapers.
I say, tell Quohog there--what's that you call him? tellQuohog to step along.
By the great anchor, what a harpoon he's gotthere! looks like good stuff that; and he handles it about right.
Isay, Quohog, or whatever your name is, did you ever stand in the headof a whale-boat? did you ever strike a fish?"Without saying a word, Queequeg, in his wild sort of way, jumped uponthe bulwarks, from thence into the bows of one of the whale-boatshanging to the side; and then bracing his left knee, and poising hisharpoon, cried out in some such way as this:--"Cap'ain, you see him small drop tar on water dere? You see him?well, spose him one whale eye, well, den!" and taking sharp aim atit, he darted the iron right over old Bildad's broad brim, cleanacross the ship's decks, and struck the glistening tar spot out ofsight.
"Now," said Queequeg, quietly hauling in the line, "spos-ee himwhale-e eye; why, dad whale dead.
""Quick, Bildad," said Peleg, his partner, who, aghast at the closevicinity of the flying harpoon, had retreated towards the cabingangway.
"Quick, I say, you Bildad, and get the ship's papers.
Wemust have Hedgehog there, I mean Quohog, in one of our boats.
Lookye, Quohog, we'll give ye the ninetieth lay, and that's more thanever was given a harpooneer yet out of Nantucket.
"So down we went into the cabin, and to my great joy Queequeg was soonenrolled among the same ship's company to which I myself belonged.
When all preliminaries were over and Peleg had got everything readyfor signing, he turned to me and said, "I guess, Quohog there don'tknow how to write, does he? I say, Quohog, blast ye! dost thou signthy name or make thy mark?But at this question, Queequeg, who had twice or thrice before takenpart in similar ceremonies, looked no ways abashed; but taking theoffered pen, copied upon the paper, in the proper place, an exactcounterpart of a queer round figure which was tattooed upon his arm;so that through Captain Peleg's obstinate mistake touching hisappellative, it stood something like this:--Quohog.
his X mark.
Meanwhile Captain Bildad sat earnestly and steadfastly eyeingQueequeg, and at last rising solemnly and fumbling in the hugepockets of his broad-skirted drab coat, took out a bundle of tracts,and selecting one entitled "The Latter Day Coming; or No Time toLose," placed it in Queequeg's hands, and then grasping them and thebook with both his, looked earnestly into his eyes, and said, "Son ofdarkness, I must do my duty by thee; I am part owner of this ship,and feel concerned for the souls of all its crew; if thou stillclingest to thy Pagan ways, which I sadly fear, I beseech thee,remain not for aye a Belial bondsman.
Spurn the idol Bell, and thehideous dragon; turn from the wrath to come; mind thine eye, I say;oh! goodness gracious! steer clear of the fiery pit!"Something of the salt sea yet lingered in old Bildad's language,heterogeneously mixed with Scriptural and domestic phrases.
"Avast there, avast there, Bildad, avast now spoiling ourharpooneer," Peleg.
"Pious harpooneers never make good voyagers--ittakes the shark out of 'em; no harpooneer is worth a straw who aintpretty sharkish.
There was young Nat Swaine, once the bravestboat-header out of all Nantucket and the Vineyard; he joined themeeting, and never came to good.
He got so frightened about hisplaguy soul, that he shrinked and sheered away from whales, for fearof after-claps, in case he got stove and went to Davy Jones.
""Peleg! Peleg!" said Bildad, lifting his eyes and hands, "thouthyself, as I myself, hast seen many a perilous time; thou knowest,Peleg, what it is to have the fear of death; how, then, can'st thouprate in this ungodly guise.
Thou beliest thine own heart, Peleg.
Tell me, when this same Pequod here had her three masts overboard inthat typhoon on Japan, that same voyage when thou went mate withCaptain Ahab, did'st thou not think of Death and the Judgment then?""Hear him, hear him now," cried Peleg, marching across the cabin, andthrusting his hands far down into his pockets,--"hear him, all of ye.
Think of that! When every moment we thought the ship would sink!Death and the Judgment then? What? With all three masts making suchan everlasting thundering against the side; and every sea breakingover us, fore and aft.
Think of Death and the Judgment then? No!no time to think about Death then.
Life was what Captain Ahab and Iwas thinking of; and how to save all hands--how to rigjury-masts--how to get into the nearest port; that was what I wasthinking of.
"Bildad said no more, but buttoning up his coat, stalked on deck,where we followed him.
There he stood, very quietly overlooking somesailmakers who were mending a top-sail in the waist.
Now and then hestooped to pick up a patch, or save an end of tarred twine, whichotherwise might have been wasted.
The Prophet.
"Shipmates, have ye shipped in that ship?"Queequeg and I had just left the Pequod, and were sauntering away fromthe water, for the moment each occupied with his own thoughts, whenthe above words were put to us by a stranger, who, pausing before us,levelled his massive forefinger at the vessel in question.
He wasbut shabbily apparelled in faded jacket and patched trowsers; a ragof a black handkerchief investing his neck.
A confluent small-poxhad in all directions flowed over his face, and left it like thecomplicated ribbed bed of a torrent, when the rushing waters havebeen dried up.
"Have ye shipped in her?" he repeated.
"You mean the ship Pequod, I suppose," said I, trying to gain alittle more time for an uninterrupted look at him.
"Aye, the Pequod--that ship there," he said, drawing back his wholearm, and then rapidly shoving it straight out from him, with thefixed bayonet of his pointed finger darted full at the object.
"Yes," said I, "we have just signed the articles.
""Anything down there about your souls?""About what?""Oh, perhaps you hav'n't got any," he said quickly.
"No matterthough, I know many chaps that hav'n't got any,--good luck to 'em;and they are all the better off for it.
A soul's a sort of a fifthwheel to a wagon.
""What are you jabbering about, shipmate?" said I.
"HE'S got enough, though, to make up for all deficiencies of thatsort in other chaps," abruptly said the stranger, placing a nervousemphasis upon the word HE.
"Queequeg," said I, "let's go; this fellow has broken loose fromsomewhere; he's talking about something and somebody we don't know.
""Stop!" cried the stranger.
"Ye said true--ye hav'n't seen OldThunder yet, have ye?""Who's Old Thunder?" said I, again riveted with the insaneearnestness of his manner.
"Captain Ahab.
""What! the captain of our ship, the Pequod?""Aye, among some of us old sailor chaps, he goes by that name.
Yehav'n't seen him yet, have ye?""No, we hav'n't.
He's sick they say, but is getting better, and willbe all right again before long.
""All right again before long!" laughed the stranger, with a solemnlyderisive sort of laugh.
"Look ye; when Captain Ahab is all right,then this left arm of mine will be all right; not before.
""What do you know about him?""What did they TELL you about him? Say that!""They didn't tell much of anything about him; only I've heard thathe's a good whale-hunter, and a good captain to his crew.
""That's true, that's true--yes, both true enough.
But you must jumpwhen he gives an order.
Step and growl; growl and go--that's theword with Captain Ahab.
But nothing about that thing that happenedto him off Cape Horn, long ago, when he lay like dead for three daysand nights; nothing about that deadly skrimmage with the Spaniardafore the altar in Santa?--heard nothing about that, eh? Nothingabout the silver calabash he spat into? And nothing about his losinghis leg last voyage, according to the prophecy.
Didn't ye hear aword about them matters and something more, eh? No, I don't think yedid; how could ye? Who knows it? Not all Nantucket, I guess.
Buthows'ever, mayhap, ye've heard tell about the leg, and how he lostit; aye, ye have heard of that, I dare say.
Oh yes, THAT every oneknows a'most--I mean they know he's only one leg; and that aparmacetti took the other off.
""My friend," said I, "what all this gibberish of yours is about, Idon't know, and I don't much care; for it seems to me that you mustbe a little damaged in the head.
But if you are speaking of CaptainAhab, of that ship there, the Pequod, then let me tell you, that Iknow all about the loss of his leg.
""ALL about it, eh--sure you do?--all?""Pretty sure.
"With finger pointed and eye levelled at the Pequod, the beggar-likestranger stood a moment, as if in a troubled reverie; then starting alittle, turned and said:--"Ye've shipped, have ye? Names down on thepapers? Well, well, what's signed, is signed; and what's to be, willbe; and then again, perhaps it won't be, after all.
Anyhow, it'sall fixed and arranged a'ready; and some sailors or other must gowith him, I suppose; as well these as any other men, God pity 'em!Morning to ye, shipmates, morning; the ineffable heavens bless ye;I'm sorry I stopped ye.
""Look here, friend," said I, "if you have anything important to tellus, out with it; but if you are only trying to bamboozle us, you aremistaken in your game; that's all I have to say.
""And it's said very well, and I like to hear a chap talk up that way;you are just the man for him--the likes of ye.
Morning to ye,shipmates, morning! Oh! when ye get there, tell 'em I've concludednot to make one of 'em.
""Ah, my dear fellow, you can't fool us that way--you can't fool us.
It is the easiest thing in the world for a man to look as if he had agreat secret in him.
""Morning to ye, shipmates, morning.
""Morning it is," said I.
"Come along, Queequeg, let's leave thiscrazy man.
But stop, tell me your name, will you?""Elijah.
"Elijah! thought I, and we walked away, both commenting, after eachother's fashion, upon this ragged old sailor; and agreed that he wasnothing but a humbug, trying to be a bugbear.
But we had not goneperhaps above a hundred yards, when chancing to turn a corner, andlooking back as I did so, who should be seen but Elijah following us,though at a distance.
Somehow, the sight of him struck me so, that Isaid nothing to Queequeg of his being behind, but passed on with mycomrade, anxious to see whether the stranger would turn the samecorner that we did.
He did; and then it seemed to me that he wasdogging us, but with what intent I could not for the life of meimagine.
This circumstance, coupled with his ambiguous,half-hinting, half-revealing, shrouded sort of talk, now begat in meall kinds of vague wonderments and half-apprehensions, and allconnected with the Pequod; and Captain Ahab; and the leg he had lost;and the Cape Horn fit; and the silver calabash; and what CaptainPeleg had said of him, when I left the ship the day previous; and theprediction of the squaw Tistig; and the voyage we had bound ourselvesto sail; and a hundred other shadowy things.
I was resolved to satisfy myself whether this ragged Elijah wasreally dogging us or not, and with that intent crossed the way withQueequeg, and on that side of it retraced our steps.
But Elijahpassed on, without seeming to notice us.
This relieved me; and oncemore, and finally as it seemed to me, I pronounced him in my heart, ahumbug.
All Astir.
A day or two passed, and there was great activity aboard the Pequod.
Not only were the old sails being mended, but new sails were comingon board, and bolts of canvas, and coils of rigging; in short,everything betokened that the ship's preparations were hurrying to aclose.
Captain Peleg seldom or never went ashore, but sat in hiswigwam keeping a sharp look-out upon the hands: Bildad did all thepurchasing and providing at the stores; and the men employed in thehold and on the rigging were working till long after night-fall.
On the day following Queequeg's signing the articles, word was givenat all the inns where the ship's company were stopping, that theirchests must be on board before night, for there was no telling howsoon the vessel might be sailing.
So Queequeg and I got down ourtraps, resolving, however, to sleep ashore till the last.
But itseems they always give very long notice in these cases, and the shipdid not sail for several days.
But no wonder; there was a good dealto be done, and there is no telling how many things to be thought of,before the Pequod was fully equipped.
Every one knows what a multitude of things--beds, sauce-pans, knivesand forks, shovels and tongs, napkins, nut-crackers, and what not,are indispensable to the business of housekeeping.
Just so withwhaling, which necessitates a three-years' housekeeping upon the wideocean, far from all grocers, costermongers, doctors, bakers, andbankers.
And though this also holds true of merchant vessels, yetnot by any means to the same extent as with whalemen.
For besidesthe great length of the whaling voyage, the numerous articlespeculiar to the prosecution of the fishery, and the impossibility ofreplacing them at the remote harbors usually frequented, it must beremembered, that of all ships, whaling vessels are the most exposedto accidents of all kinds, and especially to the destruction and lossof the very things upon which the success of the voyage most depends.
Hence, the spare boats, spare spars, and spare lines and harpoons,and spare everythings, almost, but a spare Captain and duplicateship.
At the period of our arrival at the Island, the heaviest storage ofthe Pequod had been almost completed; comprising her beef, bread,water, fuel, and iron hoops and staves.
But, as before hinted, forsome time there was a continual fetching and carrying on board ofdivers odds and ends of things, both large and small.
Chief among those who did this fetching and carrying was CaptainBildad's sister, a lean old lady of a most determined andindefatigable spirit, but withal very kindhearted, who seemedresolved that, if SHE could help it, nothing should be found wantingin the Pequod, after once fairly getting to sea.
At one time shewould come on board with a jar of pickles for the steward's pantry;another time with a bunch of quills for the chief mate's desk, wherehe kept his log; a third time with a roll of flannel for the small ofsome one's rheumatic back.
Never did any woman better deserve hername, which was Charity--Aunt Charity, as everybody called her.
Andlike a sister of charity did this charitable Aunt Charity bustleabout hither and thither, ready to turn her hand and heart toanything that promised to yield safety, comfort, and consolation toall on board a ship in which her beloved brother Bildad wasconcerned, and in which she herself owned a score or two ofwell-saved dollars.
But it was startling to see this excellent hearted Quakeress comingon board, as she did the last day, with a long oil-ladle in one hand,and a still longer whaling lance in the other.
Nor was Bildad himselfnor Captain Peleg at all backward.
As for Bildad, he carried aboutwith him a long list of the articles needed, and at every fresharrival, down went his mark opposite that article upon the paper.
Every once in a while Peleg came hobbling out of his whalebone den,roaring at the men down the hatchways, roaring up to the riggers atthe mast-head, and then concluded by roaring back into his wigwam.
During these days of preparation, Queequeg and I often visited thecraft, and as often I asked about Captain Ahab, and how he was, andwhen he was going to come on board his ship.
To these questions theywould answer, that he was getting better and better, and was expectedaboard every day; meantime, the two captains, Peleg and Bildad, couldattend to everything necessary to fit the vessel for the voyage.
IfI had been downright honest with myself, I would have seen veryplainly in my heart that I did but half fancy being committed thisway to so long a voyage, without once laying my eyes on the man whowas to be the absolute dictator of it, so soon as the ship sailed outupon the open sea.
But when a man suspects any wrong, it sometimeshappens that if he be already involved in the matter, he insensiblystrives to cover up his suspicions even from himself.
And much thisway it was with me.
I said nothing, and tried to think nothing.
At last it was given out that some time next day the ship wouldcertainly sail.
So next morning, Queequeg and I took a very earlystart.
Going Aboard.
It was nearly six o'clock, but only grey imperfect misty dawn, whenwe drew nigh the wharf.
"There are some sailors running ahead there, if I see right," said Ito Queequeg, "it can't be shadows; she's off by sunrise, I guess;come on!""Avast!" cried a voice, whose owner at the same time coming closebehind us, laid a hand upon both our shoulders, and then insinuatinghimself between us, stood stooping forward a little, in the uncertaintwilight, strangely peering from Queequeg to me.
It was Elijah.
"Going aboard?""Hands off, will you," said I.
"Lookee here," said Queequeg, shaking himself, "go 'way!""Ain't going aboard, then?""Yes, we are," said I, "but what business is that of yours? Do youknow, Mr.
Elijah, that I consider you a little impertinent?""No, no, no; I wasn't aware of that," said Elijah, slowly andwonderingly looking from me to Queequeg, with the most unaccountableglances.
"Elijah," said I, "you will oblige my friend and me by withdrawing.
We are going to the Indian and Pacific Oceans, and would prefer notto be detained.
""Ye be, be ye? Coming back afore breakfast?""He's cracked, Queequeg," said I, "come on.
""Holloa!" cried stationary Elijah, hailing us when we had removed afew paces.
"Never mind him," said I, "Queequeg, come on.
"But he stole up to us again, and suddenly clapping his hand on myshoulder, said--"Did ye see anything looking like men going towardsthat ship a while ago?"Struck by this plain matter-of-fact question, I answered, saying,"Yes, I thought I did see four or five men; but it was too dim to besure.
""Very dim, very dim," said Elijah.
"Morning to ye.
"Once more we quitted him; but once more he came softly after us; andtouching my shoulder again, said, "See if you can find 'em now, willye?"Find who?""Morning to ye! morning to ye!" he rejoined, again moving off.
"Oh!I was going to warn ye against--but never mind, never mind--it's allone, all in the family too;--sharp frost this morning, ain't it?Good-bye to ye.
Shan't see ye again very soon, I guess; unless it'sbefore the Grand Jury.
" And with these cracked words he finallydeparted, leaving me, for the moment, in no small wonderment at hisfrantic impudence.
At last, stepping on board the Pequod, we found everything inprofound quiet, not a soul moving.
The cabin entrance was lockedwithin; the hatches were all on, and lumbered with coils of rigging.
Going forward to the forecastle, we found the slide of the scuttleopen.
Seeing a light, we went down, and found only an old riggerthere, wrapped in a tattered pea-jacket.
He was thrown at wholelength upon two chests, his face downwards and inclosed in his foldedarms.
The profoundest slumber slept upon him.
"Those sailors we saw, Queequeg, where can they have gone to?" saidI, looking dubiously at the sleeper.
But it seemed that, when on thewharf, Queequeg had not at all noticed what I now alluded to; hence Iwould have thought myself to have been optically deceived in thatmatter, were it not for Elijah's otherwise inexplicable question.
But I beat the thing down; and again marking the sleeper, jocularlyhinted to Queequeg that perhaps we had best sit up with the body;telling him to establish himself accordingly.
He put his hand uponthe sleeper's rear, as though feeling if it was soft enough; andthen, without more ado, sat quietly down there.
"Gracious! Queequeg, don't sit there," said I.
"Oh! perry dood seat," said Queequeg, "my country way; won't hurthim face.
""Face!" said I, "call that his face? very benevolent countenancethen; but how hard he breathes, he's heaving himself; get off,Queequeg, you are heavy, it's grinding the face of the poor.
Getoff, Queequeg! Look, he'll twitch you off soon.
I wonder he don'twake.
"Queequeg removed himself to just beyond the head of the sleeper, andlighted his tomahawk pipe.
I sat at the feet.
We kept the pipepassing over the sleeper, from one to the other.
Meanwhile, uponquestioning him in his broken fashion, Queequeg gave me to understandthat, in his land, owing to the absence of settees and sofas of allsorts, the king, chiefs, and great people generally, were in thecustom of fattening some of the lower orders for ottomans; and tofurnish a house comfortably in that respect, you had only to buy upeight or ten lazy fellows, and lay them round in the piers andalcoves.
Besides, it was very convenient on an excursion; muchbetter than those garden-chairs which are convertible intowalking-sticks; upon occasion, a chief calling his attendant, anddesiring him to make a settee of himself under a spreading tree,perhaps in some damp marshy place.
While narrating these things, every time Queequeg received thetomahawk from me, he flourished the hatchet-side of it over thesleeper's head.
"What's that for, Queequeg?""Perry easy, kill-e; oh! perry easy!He was going on with some wild reminiscences about his tomahawk-pipe,which, it seemed, had in its two uses both brained his foes andsoothed his soul, when we were directly attracted to the sleepingrigger.
The strong vapour now completely filling the contracted hole,it began to tell upon him.
He breathed with a sort of muffledness;then seemed troubled in the nose; then revolved over once or twice;then sat up and rubbed his eyes.
"Holloa!" he breathed at last, "who be ye smokers?""Shipped men," answered I, "when does she sail?""Aye, aye, ye are going in her, be ye? She sails to-day.
TheCaptain came aboard last night.
""What Captain?--Ahab?""Who but him indeed?"I was going to ask him some further questions concerning Ahab, whenwe heard a noise on deck.
"Holloa! Starbuck's astir," said the rigger.
"He's a lively chiefmate, that; good man, and a pious; but all alive now, I must turnto.
" And so saying he went on deck, and we followed.
It was now clear sunrise.
Soon the crew came on board in twos andthrees; the riggers bestirred themselves; the mates were activelyengaged; and several of the shore people were busy in bringingvarious last things on board.
Meanwhile Captain Ahab remainedinvisibly enshrined within his cabin.
Merry Christmas.
At length, towards noon, upon the final dismissal of the ship'sriggers, and after the Pequod had been hauled out from the wharf, andafter the ever-thoughtful Charity had come off in a whale-boat, withher last gift--a night-cap for Stubb, the second mate, herbrother-in-law, and a spare Bible for the steward--after all this,the two Captains, Peleg and Bildad, issued from the cabin, andturning to the chief mate, Peleg said:"Now, Mr.
Starbuck, are you sure everything is right? Captain Ahabis all ready--just spoke to him--nothing more to be got from shore,eh? Well, call all hands, then.
Muster 'em aft here--blast 'em!""No need of profane words, however great the hurry, Peleg," saidBildad, "but away with thee, friend Starbuck, and do our bidding.
"How now! Here upon the very point of starting for the voyage,Captain Peleg and Captain Bildad were going it with a high hand onthe quarter-deck, just as if they were to be joint-commanders at sea,as well as to all appearances in port.
And, as for Captain Ahab, nosign of him was yet to be seen; only, they said he was in the cabin.
But then, the idea was, that his presence was by no means necessaryin getting the ship under weigh, and steering her well out to sea.
Indeed, as that was not at all his proper business, but the pilot's;and as he was not yet completely recovered--so they said--therefore,Captain Ahab stayed below.
And all this seemed natural enough;especially as in the merchant service many captains never showthemselves on deck for a considerable time after heaving up theanchor, but remain over the cabin table, having a farewellmerry-making with their shore friends, before they quit the ship forgood with the pilot.
But there was not much chance to think over the matter, for CaptainPeleg was now all alive.
He seemed to do most of the talking andcommanding, and not Bildad.
"Aft here, ye sons of bachelors," he cried, as the sailors lingeredat the main-mast.
"Mr.
Starbuck, drive'em aft.
""Strike the tent there!"--was the next order.
As I hinted before,this whalebone marquee was never pitched except in port; and on boardthe Pequod, for thirty years, the order to strike the tent was wellknown to be the next thing to heaving up the anchor.
"Man the capstan! Blood and thunder!--jump!"--was the next command,and the crew sprang for the handspikes.
Now in getting under weigh, the station generally occupied by thepilot is the forward part of the ship.
And here Bildad, who, withPeleg, be it known, in addition to his other officers, was one of thelicensed pilots of the port--he being suspected to have got himselfmade a pilot in order to save the Nantucket pilot-fee to all theships he was concerned in, for he never piloted any othercraft--Bildad, I say, might now be seen actively engaged in lookingover the bows for the approaching anchor, and at intervals singingwhat seemed a dismal stave of psalmody, to cheer the hands at thewindlass, who roared forth some sort of a chorus about the girls inBooble Alley, with hearty good will.
Nevertheless, not three daysprevious, Bildad had told them that no profane songs would be allowedon board the Pequod, particularly in getting under weigh; andCharity, his sister, had placed a small choice copy of Watts in eachseaman's berth.
Meantime, overseeing the other part of the ship, Captain Peleg rippedand swore astern in the most frightful manner.
I almost thought hewould sink the ship before the anchor could be got up; involuntarilyI paused on my handspike, and told Queequeg to do the same, thinkingof the perils we both ran, in starting on the voyage with such adevil for a pilot.
I was comforting myself, however, with thethought that in pious Bildad might be found some salvation, spite ofhis seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay; when I felt a sudden sharppoke in my rear, and turning round, was horrified at the apparitionof Captain Peleg in the act of withdrawing his leg from my immediatevicinity.
That was my first kick.
"Is that the way they heave in the marchant service?" he roared.
"Spring, thou sheep-head; spring, and break thy backbone! Why don'tye spring, I say, all of ye--spring! Quohog! spring, thou chap withthe red whiskers; spring there, Scotch-cap; spring, thou greenpants.
Spring, I say, all of ye, and spring your eyes out!" And sosaying, he moved along the windlass, here and there using his legvery freely, while imperturbable Bildad kept leading off with hispsalmody.
Thinks I, Captain Peleg must have been drinking somethingto-day.
At last the anchor was up, the sails were set, and off we glided.
Itwas a short, cold Christmas; and as the short northern day mergedinto night, we found ourselves almost broad upon the wintry ocean,whose freezing spray cased us in ice, as in polished armor.
The longrows of teeth on the bulwarks glistened in the moonlight; and likethe white ivory tusks of some huge elephant, vast curving iciclesdepended from the bows.
Lank Bildad, as pilot, headed the first watch, and ever and anon, asthe old craft deep dived into the green seas, and sent the shiveringfrost all over her, and the winds howled, and the cordage rang, hissteady notes were heard,--"Sweet fields beyond the swelling flood,Stand dressed in living green.
So to the Jews old Canaan stood,While Jordan rolled between.
"Never did those sweet words sound more sweetly to me than then.
Theywere full of hope and fruition.
Spite of this frigid winter night inthe boisterous Atlantic, spite of my wet feet and wetter jacket,there was yet, it then seemed to me, many a pleasant haven in store;and meads and glades so eternally vernal, that the grass shot up bythe spring, untrodden, unwilted, remains at midsummer.
At last we gained such an offing, that the two pilots were needed nolonger.
The stout sail-boat that had accompanied us began rangingalongside.
It was curious and not unpleasing, how Peleg and Bildad were affectedat this juncture, especially Captain Bildad.
For loath to depart,yet; very loath to leave, for good, a ship bound on so long andperilous a voyage--beyond both stormy Capes; a ship in which somethousands of his hard earned dollars were invested; a ship, in whichan old shipmate sailed as captain; a man almost as old as he, oncemore starting to encounter all the terrors of the pitiless jaw; loathto say good-bye to a thing so every way brimful of every interest tohim,--poor old Bildad lingered long; paced the deck with anxiousstrides; ran down into the cabin to speak another farewell wordthere; again came on deck, and looked to windward; looked towards thewide and endless waters, only bounded by the far-off unseen EasternContinents; looked towards the land; looked aloft; looked right andleft; looked everywhere and nowhere; and at last, mechanicallycoiling a rope upon its pin, convulsively grasped stout Peleg by thehand, and holding up a lantern, for a moment stood gazing heroicallyin his face, as much as to say, "Nevertheless, friend Peleg, I canstand it; yes, I can.
"As for Peleg himself, he took it more like a philosopher; but for allhis philosophy, there was a tear twinkling in his eye, when thelantern came too near.
And he, too, did not a little run from cabinto deck--now a word below, and now a word with Starbuck, the chiefmate.
But, at last, he turned to his comrade, with a final sort of lookabout him,--"Captain Bildad--come, old shipmate, we must go.
Backthe main-yard there! Boat ahoy! Stand by to come close alongside,now! Careful, careful!--come, Bildad, boy--say your last.
Luck toye, Starbuck--luck to ye, Mr.
Stubb--luck to ye, Mr.
Flask--good-byeand good luck to ye all--and this day three years I'll have a hotsupper smoking for ye in old Nantucket.
Hurrah and away!""God bless ye, and have ye in His holy keeping, men," murmured oldBildad, almost incoherently.
"I hope ye'll have fine weather now, sothat Captain Ahab may soon be moving among ye--a pleasant sun is allhe needs, and ye'll have plenty of them in the tropic voyage ye go.
Be careful in the hunt, ye mates.
Don't stave the boats needlessly,ye harpooneers; good white cedar plank is raised full three per cent.
within the year.
Don't forget your prayers, either.
Mr.
Starbuck,mind that cooper don't waste the spare staves.
Oh! the sail-needlesare in the green locker! Don't whale it too much a' Lord's days,men; but don't miss a fair chance either, that's rejecting Heaven'sgood gifts.
Have an eye to the molasses tierce, Mr.
Stubb; it was alittle leaky, I thought.
If ye touch at the islands, Mr.
Flask,beware of fornication.
Good-bye, good-bye! Don't keep that cheesetoo long down in the hold, Mr.
Starbuck; it'll spoil.
Be carefulwith the butter--twenty cents the pound it was, and mind ye, if--""Come, come, Captain Bildad; stop palavering,--away!" and with that,Peleg hurried him over the side, and both dropt into the boat.
Ship and boat diverged; the cold, damp night breeze blew between; ascreaming gull flew overhead; the two hulls wildly rolled; we gavethree heavy-hearted cheers, and blindly plunged like fate into thelone Atlantic.
The Lee Shore.
Some chapters back, one Bulkington was spoken of, a tall, newlandedmariner, encountered in New Bedford at the inn.
When on that shivering winter's night, the Pequod thrust hervindictive bows into the cold malicious waves, who should I seestanding at her helm but Bulkington! I looked with sympathetic aweand fearfulness upon the man, who in mid-winter just landed from afour years' dangerous voyage, could so unrestingly push off again forstill another tempestuous term.
The land seemed scorching to hisfeet.
Wonderfullest things are ever the unmentionable; deep memoriesyield no epitaphs; this six-inch chapter is the stoneless grave ofBulkington.
Let me only say that it fared with him as with thestorm-tossed ship, that miserably drives along the leeward land.
Theport would fain give succor; the port is pitiful; in the port issafety, comfort, hearthstone, supper, warm blankets, friends, allthat's kind to our mortalities.
But in that gale, the port, theland, is that ship's direst jeopardy; she must fly all hospitality;one touch of land, though it but graze the keel, would make hershudder through and through.
With all her might she crowds all sailoff shore; in so doing, fights 'gainst the very winds that fain wouldblow her homeward; seeks all the lashed sea's landlessness again; forrefuge's sake forlornly rushing into peril; her only friend herbitterest foe!Know ye now, Bulkington? Glimpses do ye seem to see of that mortallyintolerable truth; that all deep, earnest thinking is but theintrepid effort of the soul to keep the open independence of her sea;while the wildest winds of heaven and earth conspire to cast her onthe treacherous, slavish shore?But as in landlessness alone resides highest truth, shoreless,indefinite as God--so, better is it to perish in that howlinginfinite, than be ingloriously dashed upon the lee, even if that weresafety! For worm-like, then, oh! who would craven crawl to land!Terrors of the terrible! is all this agony so vain? Take heart, takeheart, O Bulkington! Bear thee grimly, demigod! Up from the sprayof thy ocean-perishing--straight up, leaps thy apotheosis!The Advocate.
As Queequeg and I are now fairly embarked in this business ofwhaling; and as this business of whaling has somehow come to beregarded among landsmen as a rather unpoetical and disreputablepursuit; therefore, I am all anxiety to convince ye, ye landsmen, ofthe injustice hereby done to us hunters of whales.
In the first place, it may be deemed almost superfluous to establishthe fact, that among people at large, the business of whaling is notaccounted on a level with what are called the liberal professions.
If a stranger were introduced into any miscellaneous metropolitansociety, it would but slightly advance the general opinion of hismerits, were he presented to the company as a harpooneer, say; and ifin emulation of the naval officers he should append the initialsS.
W.
F.
(Sperm Whale Fishery) to his visiting card, such a procedurewould be deemed pre-eminently presuming and ridiculous.
Doubtless one leading reason why the world declines honouring uswhalemen, is this: they think that, at best, our vocation amounts toa butchering sort of business; and that when actively engagedtherein, we are surrounded by all manner of defilements.
Butchers weare, that is true.
But butchers, also, and butchers of the bloodiestbadge have been all Martial Commanders whom the world invariablydelights to honour.
And as for the matter of the allegeduncleanliness of our business, ye shall soon be initiated intocertain facts hitherto pretty generally unknown, and which, upon thewhole, will triumphantly plant the sperm whale-ship at least amongthe cleanliest things of this tidy earth.
But even granting thecharge in question to be true; what disordered slippery decks of awhale-ship are comparable to the unspeakable carrion of thosebattle-fields from which so many soldiers return to drink in allladies' plaudits? And if the idea of peril so much enhances thepopular conceit of the soldier's profession; let me assure ye thatmany a veteran who has freely marched up to a battery, would quicklyrecoil at the apparition of the sperm whale's vast tail, fanning intoeddies the air over his head.
For what are the comprehensibleterrors of man compared with the interlinked terrors and wonders ofGod!But, though the world scouts at us whale hunters, yet does itunwittingly pay us the profoundest homage; yea, an all-aboundingadoration! for almost all the tapers, lamps, and candles that burnround the globe, burn, as before so many shrines, to our glory!But look at this matter in other lights; weigh it in all sorts ofscales; see what we whalemen are, and have been.
Why did the Dutch in De Witt's time have admirals of their whalingfleets? Why did Louis XVI.
of France, at his own personal expense,fit out whaling ships from Dunkirk, and politely invite to that townsome score or two of families from our own island of Nantucket? Whydid Britain between the years 1750 and 1788 pay to her whalemen inbounties upwards of L1,000,000? And lastly, how comes it that wewhalemen of America now outnumber all the rest of the banded whalemenin the world; sail a navy of upwards of seven hundred vessels; mannedby eighteen thousand men; yearly consuming 4,000,000 of dollars; theships worth, at the time of sailing, $20,000,000! and every yearimporting into our harbors a well reaped harvest of $7,000,000.
Howcomes all this, if there be not something puissant in whaling?But this is not the half; look again.
I freely assert, that the cosmopolite philosopher cannot, for hislife, point out one single peaceful influence, which within the lastsixty years has operated more potentially upon the whole broad world,taken in one aggregate, than the high and mighty business of whaling.
One way and another, it has begotten events so remarkable inthemselves, and so continuously momentous in their sequential issues,that whaling may well be regarded as that Egyptian mother, who boreoffspring themselves pregnant from her womb.
It would be a hopeless,endless task to catalogue all these things.
Let a handful suffice.
For many years past the whale-ship has been the pioneer in ferretingout the remotest and least known parts of the earth.
She hasexplored seas and archipelagoes which had no chart, where no Cook orVancouver had ever sailed.
If American and European men-of-warnow peacefully ride in once savage harbors, let them fire salutes tothe honour and glory of the whale-ship, which originally showed themthe way, and first interpreted between them and the savages.
Theymay celebrate as they will the heroes of Exploring Expeditions, yourCooks, your Krusensterns; but I say that scores of anonymousCaptains have sailed out of Nantucket, that were as great, andgreater than your Cook and your Krusenstern.
For in theirsuccourless empty-handedness, they, in the heathenish sharked waters,and by the beaches of unrecorded, javelin islands, battled withvirgin wonders and terrors that Cook with all his marines andmuskets would not willingly have dared.
All that is made such aflourish of in the old South Sea Voyages, those things were but thelife-time commonplaces of our heroic Nantucketers.
Often,adventures which Vancouver dedicates three chapters to, these menaccounted unworthy of being set down in the ship's common log.
Ah,the world! Oh, the world!Until the whale fishery rounded Cape Horn, no commerce but colonial,scarcely any intercourse but colonial, was carried on between Europeand the long line of the opulent Spanish provinces on the Pacificcoast.
It was the whaleman who first broke through the jealouspolicy of the Spanish crown, touching those colonies; and, if spacepermitted, it might be distinctly shown how from those whalemen atlast eventuated the liberation of Peru, Chili, and Bolivia from theyoke of Old Spain, and the establishment of the eternal democracy inthose parts.
That great America on the other side of the sphere, Australia, wasgiven to the enlightened world by the whaleman.
After its firstblunder-born discovery by a Dutchman, all other ships long shunnedthose shores as pestiferously barbarous; but the whale-ship touchedthere.
The whale-ship is the true mother of that now mighty colony.
Moreover, in the infancy of the first Australian settlement, theemigrants were several times saved from starvation by the benevolentbiscuit of the whale-ship luckily dropping an anchor in their waters.
The uncounted isles of all Polynesia confess the same truth, and docommercial homage to the whale-ship, that cleared the way for themissionary and the merchant, and in many cases carried the primitivemissionaries to their first destinations.
If that double-boltedland, Japan, is ever to become hospitable, it is the whale-ship aloneto whom the credit will be due; for already she is on the threshold.
But if, in the face of all this, you still declare that whaling hasno aesthetically noble associations connected with it, then am Iready to shiver fifty lances with you there, and unhorse you with asplit helmet every time.
The whale has no famous author, and whaling no famous chronicler, youwill say.
THE WHALE NO FAMOUS AUTHOR, AND WHALING NO FAMOUS CHRONICLER? Whowrote the first account of our Leviathan? Who but mighty Job! Andwho composed the first narrative of a whaling-voyage? Who, but noless a prince than Alfred the Great, who, with his own royal pen,took down the words from Other, the Norwegian whale-hunter of thosetimes! And who pronounced our glowing eulogy in Parliament? Who,but Edmund Burke!True enough, but then whalemen themselves are poor devils; they haveno good blood in their veins.
NO GOOD BLOOD IN THEIR VEINS? They have something better than royalblood there.
The grandmother of Benjamin Franklin was Mary Morrel;afterwards, by marriage, Mary Folger, one of the old settlers ofNantucket, and the ancestress to a long line of Folgers andharpooneers--all kith and kin to noble Benjamin--this day darting thebarbed iron from one side of the world to the other.
Good again; but then all confess that somehow whaling is notrespectable.
WHALING NOT RESPECTABLE? Whaling is imperial! By old Englishstatutory law, the whale is declared "a royal fish.
"*Oh, that's only nominal! The whale himself has never figured in anygrand imposing way.
THE WHALE NEVER FIGURED IN ANY GRAND IMPOSING WAY? In one of themighty triumphs given to a Roman general upon his entering theworld's capital, the bones of a whale, brought all the way from theSyrian coast, were the most conspicuous object in the cymballedprocession.
**See subsequent chapters for something more on this head.
Grant it, since you cite it; but, say what you will, there is no realdignity in whaling.
NO DIGNITY IN WHALING? The dignity of our calling the very heavensattest.
Cetus is a constellation in the South! No more! Drivedown your hat in presence of the Czar, and take it off to Queequeg!No more! I know a man that, in his lifetime, has taken three hundredand fifty whales.
I account that man more honourable than that greatcaptain of antiquity who boasted of taking as many walled towns.
And, as for me, if, by any possibility, there be any as yetundiscovered prime thing in me; if I shall ever deserve any realrepute in that small but high hushed world which I might not beunreasonably ambitious of; if hereafter I shall do anything that, uponthe whole, a man might rather have done than to have left undone; if,at my death, my executors, or more properly my creditors, find anyprecious MSS.
in my desk, then here I prospectively ascribe all thehonour and the glory to whaling; for a whale-ship was my Yale Collegeand my Harvard.
Postscript.
In behalf of the dignity of whaling, I would fain advance naught butsubstantiated facts.
But after embattling his facts, an advocate whoshould wholly suppress a not unreasonable surmise, which might telleloquently upon his cause--such an advocate, would he not beblameworthy?It is well known that at the coronation of kings and queens, evenmodern ones, a certain curious process of seasoning them for theirfunctions is gone through.
There is a saltcellar of state, socalled, and there may be a castor of state.
How they use the salt,precisely--who knows? Certain I am, however, that a king's head issolemnly oiled at his coronation, even as a head of salad.
Can itbe, though, that they anoint it with a view of making its interiorrun well, as they anoint machinery? Much might be ruminated here,concerning the essential dignity of this regal process, because incommon life we esteem but meanly and contemptibly a fellow whoanoints his hair, and palpably smells of that anointing.
In truth, amature man who uses hair-oil, unless medicinally, that man hasprobably got a quoggy spot in him somewhere.
As a general rule, hecan't amount to much in his totality.
But the only thing to be considered here, is this--what kind of oilis used at coronations? Certainly it cannot be olive oil, normacassar oil, nor castor oil, nor bear's oil, nor train oil, norcod-liver oil.
What then can it possibly be, but sperm oil inits unmanufactured, unpolluted state, the sweetest of all oils?Think of that, ye loyal Britons! we whalemen supply your kings andqueens with coronation stuff!Knights and Squires.
The chief mate of the Pequod was Starbuck, a native of Nantucket, anda Quaker by descent.
He was a long, earnest man, and though born onan icy coast, seemed well adapted to endure hot latitudes, his fleshbeing hard as twice-baked biscuit.
Transported to the Indies, hislive blood would not spoil like bottled ale.
He must have been bornin some time of general drought and famine, or upon one of those fastdays for which his state is famous.
Only some thirty arid summershad he seen; those summers had dried up all his physicalsuperfluousness.
But this, his thinness, so to speak, seemed no morethe token of wasting anxieties and cares, than it seemed theindication of any bodily blight.
It was merely the condensation ofthe man.
He was by no means ill-looking; quite the contrary.
Hispure tight skin was an excellent fit; and closely wrapped up in it,and embalmed with inner health and strength, like a revivifiedEgyptian, this Starbuck seemed prepared to endure for long ages tocome, and to endure always, as now; for be it Polar snow or torridsun, like a patent chronometer, his interior vitality was warrantedto do well in all climates.
Looking into his eyes, you seemed tosee there the yet lingering images of those thousand-fold perils hehad calmly confronted through life.
A staid, steadfast man, whoselife for the most part was a telling pantomime of action, and not atame chapter of sounds.
Yet, for all his hardy sobriety andfortitude, there were certain qualities in him which at timesaffected, and in some cases seemed well nigh to overbalance all therest.
Uncommonly conscientious for a seaman, and endued with a deepnatural reverence, the wild watery loneliness of his life didtherefore strongly incline him to superstition; but to that sort ofsuperstition, which in some organizations seems rather to spring,somehow, from intelligence than from ignorance.
Outward portents andinward presentiments were his.
And if at times these things bent thewelded iron of his soul, much more did his far-away domestic memoriesof his young Cape wife and child, tend to bend him still more fromthe original ruggedness of his nature, and open him still further tothose latent influences which, in some honest-hearted men, restrainthe gush of dare-devil daring, so often evinced by others in the moreperilous vicissitudes of the fishery.
"I will have no man in myboat," said Starbuck, "who is not afraid of a whale.
" By this, heseemed to mean, not only that the most reliable and useful couragewas that which arises from the fair estimation of the encounteredperil, but that an utterly fearless man is a far more dangerouscomrade than a coward.
"Aye, aye," said Stubb, the second mate, "Starbuck, there, is ascareful a man as you'll find anywhere in this fishery.
" But we shallere long see what that word "careful" precisely means when used by aman like Stubb, or almost any other whale hunter.
Starbuck was no crusader after perils; in him courage was not asentiment; but a thing simply useful to him, and always at hand uponall mortally practical occasions.
Besides, he thought, perhaps, thatin this business of whaling, courage was one of the great stapleoutfits of the ship, like her beef and her bread, and not to befoolishly wasted.
Wherefore he had no fancy for lowering for whalesafter sun-down; nor for persisting in fighting a fish that too muchpersisted in fighting him.
For, thought Starbuck, I am here in thiscritical ocean to kill whales for my living, and not to be killed bythem for theirs; and that hundreds of men had been so killed Starbuckwell knew.
What doom was his own father's? Where, in the bottomlessdeeps, could he find the torn limbs of his brother?With memories like these in him, and, moreover, given to a certainsuperstitiousness, as has been said; the courage of this Starbuckwhich could, nevertheless, still flourish, must indeed have beenextreme.
But it was not in reasonable nature that a man soorganized, and with such terrible experiences and remembrances as hehad; it was not in nature that these things should fail in latentlyengendering an element in him, which, under suitable circumstances,would break out from its confinement, and burn all his courage up.
And brave as he might be, it was that sort of bravery chiefly,visible in some intrepid men, which, while generally abiding firm inthe conflict with seas, or winds, or whales, or any of the ordinaryirrational horrors of the world, yet cannot withstand those moreterrific, because more spiritual terrors, which sometimes menace youfrom the concentrating brow of an enraged and mighty man.
But were the coming narrative to reveal in any instance, the completeabasement of poor Starbuck's fortitude, scarce might I have the heartto write it; for it is a thing most sorrowful, nay shocking, toexpose the fall of valour in the soul.
Men may seem detestable asjoint stock-companies and nations; knaves, fools, and murderers theremay be; men may have mean and meagre faces; but man, in the ideal,is so noble and so sparkling, such a grand and glowing creature, thatover any ignominious blemish in him all his fellows should run tothrow their costliest robes.
That immaculate manliness we feelwithin ourselves, so far within us, that it remains intact though allthe outer character seem gone; bleeds with keenest anguish at theundraped spectacle of a valor-ruined man.
Nor can piety itself, atsuch a shameful sight, completely stifle her upbraidings against thepermitting stars.
But this august dignity I treat of, is not thedignity of kings and robes, but that abounding dignity which has norobed investiture.
Thou shalt see it shining in the arm that wieldsa pick or drives a spike; that democratic dignity which, on allhands, radiates without end from God; Himself! The great Godabsolute! The centre and circumference of all democracy! Hisomnipresence, our divine equality!If, then, to meanest mariners, and renegades and castaways, I shallhereafter ascribe high qualities, though dark; weave round themtragic graces; if even the most mournful, perchance the most abased,among them all, shall at times lift himself to the exalted mounts; ifI shall touch that workman's arm with some ethereal light; if I shallspread a rainbow over his disastrous set of sun; then against allmortal critics bear me out in it, thou Just Spirit of Equality,which hast spread one royal mantle of humanity over all my kind!Bear me out in it, thou great democratic God! who didst not refuse tothe swart convict, Bunyan, the pale, poetic pearl; Thou who didstclothe with doubly hammered leaves of finest gold, the stumped andpaupered arm of old Cervantes; Thou who didst pick up Andrew Jacksonfrom the pebbles; who didst hurl him upon a war-horse; who didstthunder him higher than a throne! Thou who, in all Thy mighty,earthly marchings, ever cullest Thy selectest champions from thekingly commons; bear me out in it, O God!Knights and Squires.
Stubb was the second mate.
He was a native of Cape Cod; and hence,according to local usage, was called a Cape-Cod-man.
Ahappy-go-lucky; neither craven nor valiant; taking perils as theycame with an indifferent air; and while engaged in the most imminentcrisis of the chase, toiling away, calm and collected as a journeymanjoiner engaged for the year.
Good-humored, easy, and careless, hepresided over his whale-boat as if the most deadly encounter were buta dinner, and his crew all invited guests.
He was as particularabout the comfortable arrangement of his part of the boat, as anold stage-driver is about the snugness of his box.
When close to thewhale, in the very death-lock of the fight, he handled his unpityinglance coolly and off-handedly, as a whistling tinker his hammer.
Hewould hum over his old rigadig tunes while flank and flank with themost exasperated monster.
Long usage had, for this Stubb, convertedthe jaws of death into an easy chair.
What he thought of deathitself, there is no telling.
Whether he ever thought of it at all,might be a question; but, if he ever did chance to cast his mind thatway after a comfortable dinner, no doubt, like a good sailor, he tookit to be a sort of call of the watch to tumble aloft, and bestirthemselves there, about something which he would find out when heobeyed the order, and not sooner.
What, perhaps, with other things, made Stubb such an easy-going,unfearing man, so cheerily trudging off with the burden of life in aworld full of grave pedlars, all bowed to the ground with theirpacks; what helped to bring about that almost impious good-humor ofhis; that thing must have been his pipe.
For, like his nose, hisshort, black little pipe was one of the regular features of his face.
You would almost as soon have expected him to turn out of his bunkwithout his nose as without his pipe.
He kept a whole row of pipesthere ready loaded, stuck in a rack, within easy reach of his hand;and, whenever he turned in, he smoked them all out in succession,lighting one from the other to the end of the chapter; then loadingthem again to be in readiness anew.
For, when Stubb dressed, insteadof first putting his legs into his trowsers, he put his pipe into hismouth.
I say this continual smoking must have been one cause, at least, ofhis peculiar disposition; for every one knows that this earthly air,whether ashore or afloat, is terribly infected with the namelessmiseries of the numberless mortals who have died exhaling it; and asin time of the cholera, some people go about with a camphoratedhandkerchief to their mouths; so, likewise, against all mortaltribulations, Stubb's tobacco smoke might have operated as a sort ofdisinfecting agent.
The third mate was Flask, a native of Tisbury, in Martha's Vineyard.
A short, stout, ruddy young fellow, very pugnacious concerningwhales, who somehow seemed to think that the great leviathans hadpersonally and hereditarily affronted him; and therefore it was asort of point of honour with him, to destroy them wheneverencountered.
So utterly lost was he to all sense of reverence forthe many marvels of their majestic bulk and mystic ways; and so deadto anything like an apprehension of any possible danger fromencountering them; that in his poor opinion, the wondrous whale wasbut a species of magnified mouse, or at least water-rat, requiringonly a little circumvention and some small application of time andtrouble in order to kill and boil.
This ignorant, unconsciousfearlessness of his made him a little waggish in the matter ofwhales; he followed these fish for the fun of it; and a three years'voyage round Cape Horn was only a jolly joke that lasted that lengthof time.
As a carpenter's nails are divided into wrought nails andcut nails; so mankind may be similarly divided.
Little Flask was oneof the wrought ones; made to clinch tight and last long.
They calledhim King-Post on board of the Pequod; because, in form, he could bewell likened to the short, square timber known by that name in Arcticwhalers; and which by the means of many radiating side timbersinserted into it, serves to brace the ship against the icyconcussions of those battering seas.
Now these three mates--Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask, were momentousmen.
They it was who by universal prescription commanded three of thePequod's boats as headsmen.
In that grand order of battle in whichCaptain Ahab would probably marshal his forces to descend on thewhales, these three headsmen were as captains of companies.
Or,being armed with their long keen whaling spears, they were as apicked trio of lancers; even as the harpooneers were flingers ofjavelins.
And since in this famous fishery, each mate or headsman, like aGothic Knight of old, is always accompanied by his boat-steerer orharpooneer, who in certain conjunctures provides him with a freshlance, when the former one has been badly twisted, or elbowed in theassault; and moreover, as there generally subsists between the two, aclose intimacy and friendliness; it is therefore but meet, that inthis place we set down who the Pequod's harpooneers were, and to whatheadsman each of them belonged.
First of all was Queequeg, whom Starbuck, the chief mate, hadselected for his squire.
But Queequeg is already known.
Next was Tashtego, an unmixed Indian from Gay Head, the most westerlypromontory of Martha's Vineyard, where there still exists the lastremnant of a village of red men, which has long supplied theneighboring island of Nantucket with many of her most daringharpooneers.
In the fishery, they usually go by the generic name ofGay-Headers.
Tashtego's long, lean, sable hair, his high cheekbones, and black rounding eyes--for an Indian, Oriental in theirlargeness, but Antarctic in their glittering expression--all thissufficiently proclaimed him an inheritor of the unvitiated blood ofthose proud warrior hunters, who, in quest of the great New Englandmoose, had scoured, bow in hand, the aboriginal forests of the main.
But no longer snuffing in the trail of the wild beasts of thewoodland, Tashtego now hunted in the wake of the great whales of thesea; the unerring harpoon of the son fitly replacing the infalliblearrow of the sires.
To look at the tawny brawn of his lithe snakylimbs, you would almost have credited the superstitions of some ofthe earlier Puritans, and half-believed this wild Indian to be a sonof the Prince of the Powers of the Air.
Tashtego was Stubb thesecond mate's squire.
Third among the harpooneers was Daggoo, a gigantic, coal-blacknegro-savage, with a lion-like tread--an Ahasuerus to behold.
Suspended from his ears were two golden hoops, so large that thesailors called them ring-bolts, and would talk of securing thetop-sail halyards to them.
In his youth Daggoo had voluntarilyshipped on board of a whaler, lying in a lonely bay on his nativecoast.
And never having been anywhere in the world but in Africa,Nantucket, and the pagan harbors most frequented by whalemen; andhaving now led for many years the bold life of the fishery in theships of owners uncommonly heedful of what manner of men theyshipped; Daggoo retained all his barbaric virtues, and erect as agiraffe, moved about the decks in all the pomp of six feet five inhis socks.
There was a corporeal humility in looking up at him; anda white man standing before him seemed a white flag come to beg truceof a fortress.
Curious to tell, this imperial negro, AhasuerusDaggoo, was the Squire of little Flask, who looked like a chess-manbeside him.
As for the residue of the Pequod's company, be it said,that at the present day not one in two of the many thousand menbefore the mast employed in the American whale fishery, are Americansborn, though pretty nearly all the officers are.
Herein it is thesame with the American whale fishery as with the American army andmilitary and merchant navies, and the engineering forces employed inthe construction of the American Canals and Railroads.
The same, Isay, because in all these cases the native American liberallyprovides the brains, the rest of the world as generously supplyingthe muscles.
No small number of these whaling seamen belong to theAzores, where the outward bound Nantucket whalers frequently touch toaugment their crews from the hardy peasants of those rocky shores.
In like manner, the Greenland whalers sailing out of Hull or London,put in at the Shetland Islands, to receive the full complement oftheir crew.
Upon the passage homewards, they drop them there again.
How it is, there is no telling, but Islanders seem to make the bestwhalemen.
They were nearly all Islanders in the Pequod, ISOLATOEStoo, I call such, not acknowledging the common continent of men, buteach ISOLATO living on a separate continent of his own.
Yet now,federated along one keel, what a set these Isolatoes were! AnAnacharsis Clootz deputation from all the isles of the sea, and allthe ends of the earth, accompanying Old Ahab in the Pequod to lay theworld's grievances before that bar from which not very many of themever come back.
Black Little Pip--he never did--oh, no! he wentbefore.
Poor Alabama boy! On the grim Pequod's forecastle, ye shallere long see him, beating his tambourine; prelusive of the eternaltime, when sent for, to the great quarter-deck on high, he was bidstrike in with angels, and beat his tambourine in glory; called acoward here, hailed a hero there!Ahab.
For several days after leaving Nantucket, nothing above hatches wasseen of Captain Ahab.
The mates regularly relieved each other at thewatches, and for aught that could be seen to the contrary, theyseemed to be the only commanders of the ship; only they sometimesissued from the cabin with orders so sudden and peremptory, thatafter all it was plain they but commanded vicariously.
Yes, theirsupreme lord and dictator was there, though hitherto unseen by anyeyes not permitted to penetrate into the now sacred retreat of thecabin.
Every time I ascended to the deck from my watches below, I instantlygazed aft to mark if any strange face were visible; for my firstvague disquietude touching the unknown captain, now in the seclusionof the sea, became almost a perturbation.
This was strangelyheightened at times by the ragged Elijah's diabolical incoherencesuninvitedly recurring to me, with a subtle energy I could not havebefore conceived of.
But poorly could I withstand them, much as inother moods I was almost ready to smile at the solemn whimsicalitiesof that outlandish prophet of the wharves.
But whatever it was ofapprehensiveness or uneasiness--to call it so--which I felt, yetwhenever I came to look about me in the ship, it seemed against allwarrantry to cherish such emotions.
For though the harpooneers, withthe great body of the crew, were a far more barbaric, heathenish, andmotley set than any of the tame merchant-ship companies which myprevious experiences had made me acquainted with, still I ascribedthis--and rightly ascribed it--to the fierce uniqueness of the verynature of that wild Scandinavian vocation in which I had soabandonedly embarked.
But it was especially the aspect of the threechief officers of the ship, the mates, which was most forciblycalculated to allay these colourless misgivings, and induce confidenceand cheerfulness in every presentment of the voyage.
Three better,more likely sea-officers and men, each in his own different way,could not readily be found, and they were every one of themAmericans; a Nantucketer, a Vineyarder, a Cape man.
Now, it beingChristmas when the ship shot from out her harbor, for a space we hadbiting Polar weather, though all the time running away from it to thesouthward; and by every degree and minute of latitude which wesailed, gradually leaving that merciless winter, and all itsintolerable weather behind us.
It was one of those less lowering,but still grey and gloomy enough mornings of the transition, whenwith a fair wind the ship was rushing through the water with avindictive sort of leaping and melancholy rapidity, that as I mountedto the deck at the call of the forenoon watch, so soon as I levelledmy glance towards the taffrail, foreboding shivers ran over me.
Reality outran apprehension; Captain Ahab stood upon hisquarter-deck.
There seemed no sign of common bodily illness about him, nor of therecovery from any.
He looked like a man cut away from the stake,when the fire has overrunningly wasted all the limbs withoutconsuming them, or taking away one particle from their compacted agedrobustness.
His whole high, broad form, seemed made of solid bronze,and shaped in an unalterable mould, like Cellini's cast Perseus.
Threading its way out from among his grey hairs, and continuing rightdown one side of his tawny scorched face and neck, till itdisappeared in his clothing, you saw a slender rod-like mark, lividlywhitish.
It resembled that perpendicular seam sometimes made in thestraight, lofty trunk of a great tree, when the upper lightningtearingly darts down it, and without wrenching a single twig, peelsand grooves out the bark from top to bottom, ere running off into thesoil, leaving the tree still greenly alive, but branded.
Whetherthat mark was born with him, or whether it was the scar left by somedesperate wound, no one could certainly say.
By some tacit consent,throughout the voyage little or no allusion was made to it,especially by the mates.
But once Tashtego's senior, an old Gay-HeadIndian among the crew, superstitiously asserted that not till he wasfull forty years old did Ahab become that way branded, and then itcame upon him, not in the fury of any mortal fray, but in anelemental strife at sea.
Yet, this wild hint seemed inferentiallynegatived, by what a grey Manxman insinuated, an old sepulchral man,who, having never before sailed out of Nantucket, had never ere thislaid eye upon wild Ahab.
Nevertheless, the old sea-traditions, theimmemorial credulities, popularly invested this old Manxman withpreternatural powers of discernment.
So that no white sailorseriously contradicted him when he said that if ever Captain Ahabshould be tranquilly laid out--which might hardly come to pass, so hemuttered--then, whoever should do that last office for the dead,would find a birth-mark on him from crown to sole.
So powerfully did the whole grim aspect of Ahab affect me, and thelivid brand which streaked it, that for the first few moments Ihardly noted that not a little of this overbearing grimness was owingto the barbaric white leg upon which he partly stood.
It hadpreviously come to me that this ivory leg had at sea been fashionedfrom the polished bone of the sperm whale's jaw.
"Aye, he wasdismasted off Japan," said the old Gay-Head Indian once; "but likehis dismasted craft, he shipped another mast without coming home forit.
He has a quiver of 'em.
"I was struck with the singular posture he maintained.
Upon each sideof the Pequod's quarter deck, and pretty close to the mizzen shrouds,there was an auger hole, bored about half an inch or so, into theplank.
His bone leg steadied in that hole; one arm elevated, andholding by a shroud; Captain Ahab stood erect, looking straight outbeyond the ship's ever-pitching prow.
There was an infinity offirmest fortitude, a determinate, unsurrenderable wilfulness, in thefixed and fearless, forward dedication of that glance.
Not a word hespoke; nor did his officers say aught to him; though by all theirminutest gestures and expressions, they plainly showed the uneasy, ifnot painful, consciousness of being under a troubled master-eye.
Andnot only that, but moody stricken Ahab stood before them with acrucifixion in his face; in all the nameless regal overbearingdignity of some mighty woe.
Ere long, from his first visit in the air, he withdrew into hiscabin.
But after that morning, he was every day visible to the crew;either standing in his pivot-hole, or seated upon an ivory stool hehad; or heavily walking the deck.
As the sky grew less gloomy;indeed, began to grow a little genial, he became still less and lessa recluse; as if, when the ship had sailed from home, nothing but thedead wintry bleakness of the sea had then kept him so secluded.
And,by and by, it came to pass, that he was almost continually in theair; but, as yet, for all that he said, or perceptibly did, on the atlast sunny deck, he seemed as unnecessary there as another mast.
Butthe Pequod was only making a passage now; not regularly cruising;nearly all whaling preparatives needing supervision the mates werefully competent to, so that there was little or nothing, out ofhimself, to employ or excite Ahab, now; and thus chase away, for thatone interval, the clouds that layer upon layer were piled upon hisbrow, as ever all clouds choose the loftiest peaks to pile themselvesupon.
Nevertheless, ere long, the warm, warbling persuasiveness of thepleasant, holiday weather we came to, seemed gradually to charm himfrom his mood.
For, as when the red-cheeked, dancing girls, Apriland May, trip home to the wintry, misanthropic woods; even thebarest, ruggedest, most thunder-cloven old oak will at least sendforth some few green sprouts, to welcome such glad-hearted visitants;so Ahab did, in the end, a little respond to the playful allurings ofthat girlish air.
More than once did he put forth the faint blossomof a look, which, in any other man, would have soon flowered out in asmile.
Enter Ahab; to Him, Stubb.
Some days elapsed, and ice and icebergs all astern, the Pequod nowwent rolling through the bright Quito spring, which, at sea, almostperpetually reigns on the threshold of the eternal August of theTropic.
The warmly cool, clear, ringing, perfumed, overflowing,redundant days, were as crystal goblets of Persian sherbet, heapedup--flaked up, with rose-water snow.
The starred and stately nightsseemed haughty dames in jewelled velvets, nursing at home in lonelypride, the memory of their absent conquering Earls, the goldenhelmeted suns! For sleeping man, 'twas hard to choose between suchwinsome days and such seducing nights.
But all the witcheries ofthat unwaning weather did not merely lend new spells and potencies tothe outward world.
Inward they turned upon the soul, especially whenthe still mild hours of eve came on; then, memory shot her crystalsas the clear ice most forms of noiseless twilights.
And all thesesubtle agencies, more and more they wrought on Ahab's texture.
Old age is always wakeful; as if, the longer linked with life, theless man has to do with aught that looks like death.
Amongsea-commanders, the old greybeards will oftenest leave their berthsto visit the night-cloaked deck.
It was so with Ahab; only that now,of late, he seemed so much to live in the open air, that trulyspeaking, his visits were more to the cabin, than from the cabin tothe planks.
"It feels like going down into one's tomb,"--he wouldmutter to himself--"for an old captain like me to be descending thisnarrow scuttle, to go to my grave-dug berth.
"So, almost every twenty-four hours, when the watches of the nightwere set, and the band on deck sentinelled the slumbers of the bandbelow; and when if a rope was to be hauled upon the forecastle, thesailors flung it not rudely down, as by day, but with somecautiousness dropt it to its place for fear of disturbing theirslumbering shipmates; when this sort of steady quietude would beginto prevail, habitually, the silent steersman would watch thecabin-scuttle; and ere long the old man would emerge, gripping at theiron banister, to help his crippled way.
Some considering touch ofhumanity was in him; for at times like these, he usually abstainedfrom patrolling the quarter-deck; because to his wearied mates,seeking repose within six inches of his ivory heel, such would havebeen the reverberating crack and din of that bony step, that theirdreams would have been on the crunching teeth of sharks.
But once,the mood was on him too deep for common regardings; and as withheavy, lumber-like pace he was measuring the ship from taffrail tomainmast, Stubb, the old second mate, came up from below, with acertain unassured, deprecating humorousness, hinted that if CaptainAhab was pleased to walk the planks, then, no one could say nay; butthere might be some way of muffling the noise; hinting somethingindistinctly and hesitatingly about a globe of tow, and the insertioninto it, of the ivory heel.
Ah! Stubb, thou didst not know Ahabthen.
"Am I a cannon-ball, Stubb," said Ahab, "that thou wouldst wad methat fashion? But go thy ways; I had forgot.
Below to thy nightlygrave; where such as ye sleep between shrouds, to use ye to thefilling one at last.
--Down, dog, and kennel!"Starting at the unforseen concluding exclamation of the so suddenlyscornful old man, Stubb was speechless a moment; then said excitedly,"I am not used to be spoken to that way, sir; I do but less than halflike it, sir.
""Avast! gritted Ahab between his set teeth, and violently movingaway, as if to avoid some passionate temptation.
"No, sir; not yet," said Stubb, emboldened, "I will not tamely becalled a dog, sir.
""Then be called ten times a donkey, and a mule, and an ass, andbegone, or I'll clear the world of thee!"As he said this, Ahab advanced upon him with such overbearing terrorsin his aspect, that Stubb involuntarily retreated.
"I was never served so before without giving a hard blow for it,"muttered Stubb, as he found himself descending the cabin-scuttle.
"It's very queer.
Stop, Stubb; somehow, now, I don't well knowwhether to go back and strike him, or--what's that?--down here on myknees and pray for him? Yes, that was the thought coming up in me;but it would be the first time I ever DID pray.
It's queer; veryqueer; and he's queer too; aye, take him fore and aft, he's about thequeerest old man Stubb ever sailed with.
How he flashed at me!--hiseyes like powder-pans! is he mad? Anyway there's something on hismind, as sure as there must be something on a deck when it cracks.
He aint in his bed now, either, more than three hours out of thetwenty-four; and he don't sleep then.
Didn't that Dough-Boy, thesteward, tell me that of a morning he always finds the old man'shammock clothes all rumpled and tumbled, and the sheets down at thefoot, and the coverlid almost tied into knots, and the pillow a sortof frightful hot, as though a baked brick had been on it? A hot oldman! I guess he's got what some folks ashore call a conscience; it'sa kind of Tic-Dolly-row they say--worse nor a toothache.
Well, well;I don't know what it is, but the Lord keep me from catching it.
He'sfull of riddles; I wonder what he goes into the after hold for, everynight, as Dough-Boy tells me he suspects; what's that for, I shouldlike to know? Who's made appointments with him in the hold? Ain'tthat queer, now? But there's no telling, it's the old game--Heregoes for a snooze.
Damn me, it's worth a fellow's while to be borninto the world, if only to fall right asleep.
And now that I thinkof it, that's about the first thing babies do, and that's a sort ofqueer, too.
Damn me, but all things are queer, come to think of 'em.
But that's against my principles.
Think not, is my eleventhcommandment; and sleep when you can, is my twelfth--So here goesagain.
But how's that? didn't he call me a dog? blazes! he called meten times a donkey, and piled a lot of jackasses on top of THAT! Hemight as well have kicked me, and done with it.
Maybe he DID kickme, and I didn't observe it, I was so taken all aback with his brow,somehow.
It flashed like a bleached bone.
What the devil's thematter with me? I don't stand right on my legs.
Coming afoul ofthat old man has a sort of turned me wrong side out.
By the Lord, Imust have been dreaming, though--How? how? how?--but the only way'sto stash it; so here goes to hammock again; and in the morning, I'llsee how this plaguey juggling thinks over by daylight.
"The Pipe.
When Stubb had departed, Ahab stood for a while leaning over thebulwarks; and then, as had been usual with him of late, calling asailor of the watch, he sent him below for his ivory stool, and alsohis pipe.
Lighting the pipe at the binnacle lamp and planting thestool on the weather side of the deck, he sat and smoked.
In old Norse times, the thrones of the sea-loving Danish kings werefabricated, saith tradition, of the tusks of the narwhale.
How couldone look at Ahab then, seated on that tripod of bones, withoutbethinking him of the royalty it symbolized? For a Khan of theplank, and a king of the sea, and a great lord of Leviathans wasAhab.
Some moments passed, during which the thick vapour came from his mouthin quick and constant puffs, which blew back again into his face.
"How now," he soliloquized at last, withdrawing the tube, "thissmoking no longer soothes.
Oh, my pipe! hard must it go with me ifthy charm be gone! Here have I been unconsciously toiling, notpleasuring--aye, and ignorantly smoking to windward all the while; towindward, and with such nervous whiffs, as if, like the dying whale,my final jets were the strongest and fullest of trouble.
Whatbusiness have I with this pipe? This thing that is meant forsereneness, to send up mild white vapours among mild white hairs, notamong torn iron-grey locks like mine.
I'll smoke no more--"He tossed the still lighted pipe into the sea.
The fire hissed inthe waves; the same instant the ship shot by the bubble the sinkingpipe made.
With slouched hat, Ahab lurchingly paced the planks.
Queen Mab.
Next morning Stubb accosted Flask.
"Such a queer dream, King-Post, I never had.
You know the old man'sivory leg, well I dreamed he kicked me with it; and when I tried tokick back, upon my soul, my little man, I kicked my leg right off!And then, presto! Ahab seemed a pyramid, and I, like a blazing fool,kept kicking at it.
But what was still more curious, Flask--you knowhow curious all dreams are--through all this rage that I was in, Isomehow seemed to be thinking to myself, that after all, it was notmuch of an insult, that kick from Ahab.
'Why,' thinks I, 'what's therow? It's not a real leg, only a false leg.
' And there's a mightydifference between a living thump and a dead thump.
That's whatmakes a blow from the hand, Flask, fifty times more savage to bearthan a blow from a cane.
The living member--that makes the livinginsult, my little man.
And thinks I to myself all the while, mind,while I was stubbing my silly toes against that cursed pyramid--soconfoundedly contradictory was it all, all the while, I say, I wasthinking to myself, 'what's his leg now, but a cane--a whalebonecane.
Yes,' thinks I, 'it was only a playful cudgelling--in fact,only a whaleboning that he gave me--not a base kick.
Besides,'thinks I, 'look at it once; why, the end of it--the foot part--what asmall sort of end it is; whereas, if a broad footed farmer kicked me,THERE'S a devilish broad insult.
But this insult is whittled down toa point only.
' But now comes the greatest joke of the dream, Flask.
While I was battering away at the pyramid, a sort of badger-hairedold merman, with a hump on his back, takes me by the shoulders, andslews me round.
'What are you 'bout?' says he.
Slid! man, but I wasfrightened.
Such a phiz! But, somehow, next moment I was over thefright.
'What am I about?' says I at last.
'And what business isthat of yours, I should like to know, Mr.
Humpback? Do YOU want akick?' By the lord, Flask, I had no sooner said that, than he turnedround his stern to me, bent over, and dragging up a lot of seaweed hehad for a clout--what do you think, I saw?--why thunder alive, man,his stern was stuck full of marlinspikes, with the points out.
SaysI, on second thoughts, 'I guess I won't kick you, old fellow.
' 'WiseStubb,' said he, 'wise Stubb;' and kept muttering it all the time, asort of eating of his own gums like a chimney hag.
Seeing he wasn'tgoing to stop saying over his 'wise Stubb, wise Stubb,' I thought Imight as well fall to kicking the pyramid again.
But I had only justlifted my foot for it, when he roared out, 'Stop that kicking!''Halloa,' says I, 'what's the matter now, old fellow?' 'Look yehere,' says he; 'let's argue the insult.
Captain Ahab kicked ye,didn't he?' 'Yes, he did,' says I--'right HERE it was.
' 'Verygood,' says he--'he used his ivory leg, didn't he?' 'Yes, he did,'says I.
'Well then,' says he, 'wise Stubb, what have you to complainof? Didn't he kick with right good will? it wasn't a common pitchpine leg he kicked with, was it? No, you were kicked by a great man,and with a beautiful ivory leg, Stubb.
It's an honour; I consider itan honour.
Listen, wise Stubb.
In old England the greatest lordsthink it great glory to be slapped by a queen, and madegarter-knights of; but, be YOUR boast, Stubb, that ye were kicked byold Ahab, and made a wise man of.
Remember what I say; BE kicked byhim; account his kicks honours; and on no account kick back; for youcan't help yourself, wise Stubb.
Don't you see that pyramid?' Withthat, he all of a sudden seemed somehow, in some queer fashion, toswim off into the air.
I snored; rolled over; and there I was in myhammock! Now, what do you think of that dream, Flask?""I don't know; it seems a sort of foolish to me, tho.
'""May be; may be.
But it's made a wise man of me, Flask.
D'ye seeAhab standing there, sideways looking over the stern? Well, the bestthing you can do, Flask, is to let the old man alone; never speak tohim, whatever he says.
Halloa! What's that he shouts? Hark!""Mast-head, there! Look sharp, all of ye! There are whaleshereabouts!If ye see a white one, split your lungs for him!"What do you think of that now, Flask? ain't there a small drop ofsomething queer about that, eh? A white whale--did ye mark that,man? Look ye--there's something special in the wind.
Stand by forit, Flask.
Ahab has that that's bloody on his mind.
But, mum; hecomes this way.
"Cetology.
Already we are boldly launched upon the deep; but soon we shall belost in its unshored, harbourless immensities.
Ere that come to pass;ere the Pequod's weedy hull rolls side by side with the barnacledhulls of the leviathan; at the outset it is but well to attend to amatter almost indispensable to a thorough appreciative understandingof the more special leviathanic revelations and allusions of allsorts which are to follow.
It is some systematized exhibition of the whale in his broad genera,that I would now fain put before you.
Yet is it no easy task.
Theclassification of the constituents of a chaos, nothing less is hereessayed.
Listen to what the best and latest authorities have laiddown.
"No branch of Zoology is so much involved as that which is entitledCetology," says Captain Scoresby, A.
D.
1820.
"It is not my intention, were it in my power, to enter into theinquiry as to the true method of dividing the cetacea into groups andfamilies.
Utter confusion exists among the historians of thisanimal" (sperm whale), says Surgeon Beale, A.
D.
1839.
"Unfitness to pursue our research in the unfathomable waters.
""Impenetrable veil covering our knowledge of the cetacea.
" "A fieldstrewn with thorns.
" "All these incomplete indications but serve totorture us naturalists.
"Thus speak of the whale, the great Cuvier, and John Hunter, andLesson, those lights of zoology and anatomy.
Nevertheless, though ofreal knowledge there be little, yet of books there are a plenty; andso in some small degree, with cetology, or the science of whales.
Many are the men, small and great, old and new, landsmen and seamen,who have at large or in little, written of the whale.
Run over afew:--The Authors of the Bible; Aristotle; Pliny; Aldrovandi; SirThomas Browne; Gesner; Ray; Linnaeus; Rondeletius; Willoughby; Green;Artedi; Sibbald; Brisson; Marten; Lacepede; Bonneterre; Desmarest;Baron Cuvier; Frederick Cuvier; John Hunter; Owen; Scoresby; Beale;Bennett; J.
Ross Browne; the Author of Miriam Coffin; Olmstead; andthe Rev.
T.
Cheever.
But to what ultimate generalizing purpose allthese have written, the above cited extracts will show.
Of the names in this list of whale authors, only those following Owenever saw living whales; and but one of them was a real professionalharpooneer and whaleman.
I mean Captain Scoresby.
On the separatesubject of the Greenland or right-whale, he is the best existingauthority.
But Scoresby knew nothing and says nothing of the greatsperm whale, compared with which the Greenland whale is almostunworthy mentioning.
And here be it said, that the Greenland whaleis an usurper upon the throne of the seas.
He is not even by anymeans the largest of the whales.
Yet, owing to the long priority ofhis claims, and the profound ignorance which, till some seventy yearsback, invested the then fabulous or utterly unknown sperm-whale, andwhich ignorance to this present day still reigns in all but some fewscientific retreats and whale-ports; this usurpation has been everyway complete.
Reference to nearly all the leviathanic allusions inthe great poets of past days, will satisfy you that the Greenlandwhale, without one rival, was to them the monarch of the seas.
Butthe time has at last come for a new proclamation.
This is CharingCross; hear ye! good people all,--the Greenland whale isdeposed,--the great sperm whale now reigneth!There are only two books in being which at all pretend to put theliving sperm whale before you, and at the same time, in the remotestdegree succeed in the attempt.
Those books are Beale's andBennett's; both in their time surgeons to English South-Seawhale-ships, and both exact and reliable men.
The original mattertouching the sperm whale to be found in their volumes is necessarilysmall; but so far as it goes, it is of excellent quality, thoughmostly confined to scientific description.
As yet, however, thesperm whale, scientific or poetic, lives not complete in anyliterature.
Far above all other hunted whales, his is an unwrittenlife.
Now the various species of whales need some sort of popularcomprehensive classification, if only an easy outline one for thepresent, hereafter to be filled in all its departments by subsequentlaborers.
As no better man advances to take this matter in hand, Ihereupon offer my own poor endeavors.
I promise nothing complete;because any human thing supposed to be complete, must for that veryreason infallibly be faulty.
I shall not pretend to a minuteanatomical description of the various species, or--in this place atleast--to much of any description.
My object here is simply toproject the draught of a systematization of cetology.
I am thearchitect, not the builder.
But it is a ponderous task; no ordinary letter-sorter in thePost-Office is equal to it.
To grope down into the bottom of the seaafter them; to have one's hands among the unspeakable foundations,ribs, and very pelvis of the world; this is a fearful thing.
What amI that I should essay to hook the nose of this leviathan! The awfultauntings in Job might well appal me.
"Will he the (leviathan) makea covenant with thee? Behold the hope of him is vain! But I haveswam through libraries and sailed through oceans; I have had to dowith whales with these visible hands; I am in earnest; and I willtry.
There are some preliminaries to settle.
First: The uncertain, unsettled condition of this science of Cetologyis in the very vestibule attested by the fact, that in some quartersit still remains a moot point whether a whale be a fish.
In hisSystem of Nature, A.
D.
1776, Linnaeus declares, "I hereby separatethe whales from the fish.
" But of my own knowledge, I know that downto the year 1850, sharks and shad, alewives and herring, againstLinnaeus's express edict, were still found dividing the possession ofthe same seas with the Leviathan.
The grounds upon which Linnaeus would fain have banished the whalesfrom the waters, he states as follows: "On account of their warmbilocular heart, their lungs, their movable eyelids, their hollowears, penem intrantem feminam mammis lactantem," and finally, "exlege naturae jure meritoque.
" I submitted all this to my friendsSimeon Macey and Charley Coffin, of Nantucket, both messmates of minein a certain voyage, and they united in the opinion that the reasonsset forth were altogether insufficient.
Charley profanely hintedthey were humbug.
Be it known that, waiving all argument, I take the good old fashionedground that the whale is a fish, and call upon holy Jonah to back me.
This fundamental thing settled, the next point is, in what internalrespect does the whale differ from other fish.
Above, Linnaeus hasgiven you those items.
But in brief, they are these: lungs and warmblood; whereas, all other fish are lungless and cold blooded.
Next: how shall we define the whale, by his obvious externals, so asconspicuously to label him for all time to come? To be short, then,a whale is A SPOUTING FISH WITH A HORIZONTAL TAIL.
There you havehim.
However contracted, that definition is the result of expandedmeditation.
A walrus spouts much like a whale, but the walrus is nota fish, because he is amphibious.
But the last term of thedefinition is still more cogent, as coupled with the first.
Almostany one must have noticed that all the fish familiar to landsmen havenot a flat, but a vertical, or up-and-down tail.
Whereas, amongspouting fish the tail, though it may be similarly shaped, invariablyassumes a horizontal position.
By the above definition of what a whale is, I do by no means excludefrom the leviathanic brotherhood any sea creature hitherto identifiedwith the whale by the best informed Nantucketers; nor, on the otherhand, link with it any fish hitherto authoritatively regarded asalien.
* Hence, all the smaller, spouting, and horizontal tailed fishmust be included in this ground-plan of Cetology.
Now, then, comethe grand divisions of the entire whale host.
*I am aware that down to the present time, the fish styled Lamatinsand Dugongs (Pig-fish and Sow-fish of the Coffins of Nantucket) areincluded by many naturalists among the whales.
But as these pig-fishare a noisy, contemptible set, mostly lurking in the mouths ofrivers, and feeding on wet hay, and especially as they do not spout,I deny their credentials as whales; and have presented them withtheir passports to quit the Kingdom of Cetology.
First: According to magnitude I divide the whales into three primaryall, both small and large.
I.
THE FOLIO WHALE; II.
the OCTAVO WHALE; III.
the DUODECIMO WHALE.
As the type of the FOLIO I present the SPERM WHALE; of the OCTAVO,the GRAMPUS; of the DUODECIMO, the PORPOISE.
FOLIOS.
Among these I here include the following chapters:--I.
TheSPERM WHALE; II.
the RIGHT WHALE; III.
the FIN-BACK WHALE; IV.
theHUMP-BACKED WHALE; V.
the RAZOR-BACK WHALE; VI.
the SULPHUR-BOTTOMWHALE.
English of old vaguely known as the Trumpa whale, and the Physeterwhale, and the Anvil Headed whale, is the present Cachalot of theFrench, and the Pottsfich of the Germans, and the Macrocephalus ofthe Long Words.
He is, without doubt, the largest inhabitant of theglobe; the most formidable of all whales to encounter; the mostmajestic in aspect; and lastly, by far the most valuable in commerce;he being the only creature from which that valuable substance,spermaceti, is obtained.
All his peculiarities will, in many otherplaces, be enlarged upon.
It is chiefly with his name that I nowhave to do.
Philologically considered, it is absurd.
Some centuriesago, when the Sperm whale was almost wholly unknown in his ownproper individuality, and when his oil was only accidentally obtainedfrom the stranded fish; in those days spermaceti, it would seem, waspopularly supposed to be derived from a creature identical with theone then known in England as the Greenland or Right Whale.
It wasthe idea also, that this same spermaceti was that quickening humor ofthe Greenland Whale which the first syllable of the word literallyexpresses.
In those times, also, spermaceti was exceedingly scarce,not being used for light, but only as an ointment and medicament.
Itwas only to be had from the druggists as you nowadays buy an ounce ofrhubarb.
When, as I opine, in the course of time, the true nature ofspermaceti became known, its original name was still retained by thedealers; no doubt to enhance its value by a notion so strangelysignificant of its scarcity.
And so the appellation must at lasthave come to be bestowed upon the whale from which this spermacetiwas really derived.
the most venerable of the leviathans, being the one first regularlyhunted by man.
It yields the article commonly known as whalebone orbaleen; and the oil specially known as "whale oil," an inferiorarticle in commerce.
Among the fishermen, he is indiscriminatelydesignated by all the following titles: The Whale; the GreenlandWhale; the Black Whale; the Great Whale; the True Whale; the RightWhale.
There is a deal of obscurity concerning the identity of thespecies thus multitudinously baptised.
What then is the whale, whichI include in the second species of my Folios? It is the GreatMysticetus of the English naturalists; the Greenland Whale of theEnglish whalemen; the Baliene Ordinaire of the French whalemen; theGrowlands Walfish of the Swedes.
It is the whale which for more thantwo centuries past has been hunted by the Dutch and English in theArctic seas; it is the whale which the American fishermen have longpursued in the Indian ocean, on the Brazil Banks, on the Nor' WestCoast, and various other parts of the world, designated by them RightWhale Cruising Grounds.
Some pretend to see a difference between the Greenland whale of theEnglish and the right whale of the Americans.
But they preciselyagree in all their grand features; nor has there yet been presented asingle determinate fact upon which to ground a radical distinction.
It is by endless subdivisions based upon the most inconclusivedifferences, that some departments of natural history become sorepellingly intricate.
The right whale will be elsewhere treated ofat some length, with reference to elucidating the sperm whale.
monster which, by the various names of Fin-Back, Tall-Spout, andLong-John, has been seen almost in every sea and is commonly thewhale whose distant jet is so often descried by passengers crossingthe Atlantic, in the New York packet-tracks.
In the length heattains, and in his baleen, the Fin-back resembles the right whale,but is of a less portly girth, and a lighter colour, approaching toolive.
His great lips present a cable-like aspect, formed by theintertwisting, slanting folds of large wrinkles.
His granddistinguishing feature, the fin, from which he derives his name, isoften a conspicuous object.
This fin is some three or four feetlong, growing vertically from the hinder part of the back, of anangular shape, and with a very sharp pointed end.
Even if not theslightest other part of the creature be visible, this isolated finwill, at times, be seen plainly projecting from the surface.
Whenthe sea is moderately calm, and slightly marked with sphericalripples, and this gnomon-like fin stands up and casts shadows uponthe wrinkled surface, it may well be supposed that the watery circlesurrounding it somewhat resembles a dial, with its style and wavyhour-lines graved on it.
On that Ahaz-dial the shadow often goesback.
The Fin-Back is not gregarious.
He seems a whale-hater, assome men are man-haters.
Very shy; always going solitary;unexpectedly rising to the surface in the remotest and most sullenwaters; his straight and single lofty jet rising like a tallmisanthropic spear upon a barren plain; gifted with such wondrouspower and velocity in swimming, as to defy all present pursuit fromman; this leviathan seems the banished and unconquerable Cain of hisrace, bearing for his mark that style upon his back.
From having thebaleen in his mouth, the Fin-Back is sometimes included with theright whale, among a theoretic species denominated WHALEBONE WHALES,that is, whales with baleen.
Of these so called Whalebone whales,there would seem to be several varieties, most of which, however, arelittle known.
Broad-nosed whales and beaked whales; pike-headedwhales; bunched whales; under-jawed whales and rostrated whales, arethe fishermen's names for a few sorts.
In connection with this appellative of "Whalebone whales," it is ofgreat importance to mention, that however such a nomenclature may beconvenient in facilitating allusions to some kind of whales, yet itis in vain to attempt a clear classification of the Leviathan,founded upon either his baleen, or hump, or fin, or teeth;notwithstanding that those marked parts or features very obviouslyseem better adapted to afford the basis for a regular system ofCetology than any other detached bodily distinctions, which thewhale, in his kinds, presents.
How then? The baleen, hump,back-fin, and teeth; these are things whose peculiarities areindiscriminately dispersed among all sorts of whales, without anyregard to what may be the nature of their structure in other andmore essential particulars.
Thus, the sperm whale and the humpbackedwhale, each has a hump; but there the similitude ceases.
Then, thissame humpbacked whale and the Greenland whale, each of these hasbaleen; but there again the similitude ceases.
And it is just thesame with the other parts above mentioned.
In various sorts ofwhales, they form such irregular combinations; or, in the case of anyone of them detached, such an irregular isolation; as utterly to defyall general methodization formed upon such a basis.
On this rockevery one of the whale-naturalists has split.
But it may possibly be conceived that, in the internal parts of thewhale, in his anatomy--there, at least, we shall be able to hit theright classification.
Nay; what thing, for example, is there in theGreenland whale's anatomy more striking than his baleen? Yet we haveseen that by his baleen it is impossible correctly to classify theGreenland whale.
And if you descend into the bowels of the variousleviathans, why there you will not find distinctions a fiftieth partas available to the systematizer as those external ones alreadyenumerated.
What then remains? nothing but to take hold of thewhales bodily, in their entire liberal volume, and boldly sort themthat way.
And this is the Bibliographical system here adopted; andit is the only one that can possibly succeed, for it alone ispracticable.
To proceed.
the northern American coast.
He has been frequently captured there,and towed into harbor.
He has a great pack on him like a peddler; oryou might call him the Elephant and Castle whale.
At any rate, thepopular name for him does not sufficiently distinguish him, since thesperm whale also has a hump though a smaller one.
His oil is notvery valuable.
He has baleen.
He is the most gamesome andlight-hearted of all the whales, making more gay foam and white watergenerally than any other of them.
known but his name.
I have seen him at a distance off Cape Horn.
Ofa retiring nature, he eludes both hunters and philosophers.
Thoughno coward, he has never yet shown any part of him but his back, whichrises in a long sharp ridge.
Let him go.
I know little more of him,nor does anybody else.
gentleman, with a brimstone belly, doubtless got by scraping alongthe Tartarian tiles in some of his profounder divings.
He is seldomseen; at least I have never seen him except in the remoter southernseas, and then always at too great a distance to study hiscountenance.
He is never chased; he would run away with rope-walksof line.
Prodigies are told of him.
Adieu, Sulphur Bottom! I cansay nothing more that is true of ye, nor can the oldest Nantucketer.
Thus ends BOOK I.
(FOLIO), and now begins BOOK II.
(OCTAVO).
OCTAVOES.
*--These embrace the whales of middling magnitude, amongwhich present may be numbered:--I.
, the GRAMPUS; II.
, the BLACK FISH;III.
, the NARWHALE; IV.
, the THRASHER; V.
, the KILLER.
*Why this book of whales is not denominated the Quarto is very plain.
Because, while the whales of this order, though smaller than thoseof the former order, nevertheless retain a proportionate likeness tothem in figure, yet the bookbinder's Quarto volume in its dimensionedform does not preserve the shape of the Folio volume, but the Octavovolume does.
loud sonorous breathing, or rather blowing, has furnished a proverbto landsmen, is so well known a denizen of the deep, yet is he notpopularly classed among whales.
But possessing all the granddistinctive features of the leviathan, most naturalists haverecognised him for one.
He is of moderate octavo size, varying fromfifteen to twenty-five feet in length, and of correspondingdimensions round the waist.
He swims in herds; he is never regularlyhunted, though his oil is considerable in quantity, and pretty goodfor light.
By some fishermen his approach is regarded as premonitoryof the advance of the great sperm whale.
fishermen's names for all these fish, for generally they are thebest.
Where any name happens to be vague or inexpressive, I shallsay so, and suggest another.
I do so now, touching the Black Fish,so-called, because blackness is the rule among almost all whales.
So, call him the Hyena Whale, if you please.
His voracity is wellknown, and from the circumstance that the inner angles of his lipsare curved upwards, he carries an everlasting Mephistophelean grin onhis face.
This whale averages some sixteen or eighteen feet inlength.
He is found in almost all latitudes.
He has a peculiar wayof showing his dorsal hooked fin in swimming, which looks somethinglike a Roman nose.
When not more profitably employed, the spermwhale hunters sometimes capture the Hyena whale, to keep up thesupply of cheap oil for domestic employment--as some frugalhousekeepers, in the absence of company, and quite alone bythemselves, burn unsavory tallow instead of odorous wax.
Thoughtheir blubber is very thin, some of these whales will yield youupwards of thirty gallons of oil.
WHALE.
--Another instance of a curiously named whale, so named Isuppose from his peculiar horn being originally mistaken for a peakednose.
The creature is some sixteen feet in length, while its hornaverages five feet, though some exceed ten, and even attain tofifteen feet.
Strictly speaking, this horn is but a lengthened tusk,growing out from the jaw in a line a little depressed from thehorizontal.
But it is only found on the sinister side, which has anill effect, giving its owner something analogous to the aspect of aclumsy left-handed man.
What precise purpose this ivory horn orlance answers, it would be hard to say.
It does not seem to be usedlike the blade of the sword-fish and bill-fish; though some sailorstell me that the Narwhale employs it for a rake in turning over thebottom of the sea for food.
Charley Coffin said it was used for anice-piercer; for the Narwhale, rising to the surface of the PolarSea, and finding it sheeted with ice, thrusts his horn up, and sobreaks through.
But you cannot prove either of these surmises to becorrect.
My own opinion is, that however this one-sided horn mayreally be used by the Narwhale--however that may be--it wouldcertainly be very convenient to him for a folder in readingpamphlets.
The Narwhale I have heard called the Tusked whale, theHorned whale, and the Unicorn whale.
He is certainly a curiousexample of the Unicornism to be found in almost every kingdom ofanimated nature.
From certain cloistered old authors I have gatheredthat this same sea-unicorn's horn was in ancient days regarded as thegreat antidote against poison, and as such, preparations of itbrought immense prices.
It was also distilled to a volatile saltsfor fainting ladies, the same way that the horns of the male deer aremanufactured into hartshorn.
Originally it was in itself accountedan object of great curiosity.
Black Letter tells me that Sir MartinFrobisher on his return from that voyage, when Queen Bess didgallantly wave her jewelled hand to him from a window of GreenwichPalace, as his bold ship sailed down the Thames; "when Sir Martinreturned from that voyage," saith Black Letter, "on bended knees hepresented to her highness a prodigious long horn of the Narwhale,which for a long period after hung in the castle at Windsor.
" AnIrish author avers that the Earl of Leicester, on bended knees, didlikewise present to her highness another horn, pertaining to a landbeast of the unicorn nature.
The Narwhale has a very picturesque, leopard-like look, being of amilk-white ground colour, dotted with round and oblong spots of black.
His oil is very superior, clear and fine; but there is little of it,and he is seldom hunted.
He is mostly found in the circumpolar seas.
precisely known to the Nantucketer, and nothing at all to theprofessed naturalist.
From what I have seen of him at a distance,I should say that he was about the bigness of a grampus.
He is verysavage--a sort of Feegee fish.
He sometimes takes the great Foliowhales by the lip, and hangs there like a leech, till the mightybrute is worried to death.
The Killer is never hunted.
I neverheard what sort of oil he has.
Exception might be taken to the namebestowed upon this whale, on the ground of its indistinctness.
Forwe are all killers, on land and on sea; Bonapartes and Sharksincluded.
for his tail, which he uses for a ferule in thrashing his foes.
Hemounts the Folio whale's back, and as he swims, he works his passageby flogging him; as some schoolmasters get along in the world by asimilar process.
Still less is known of the Thrasher than of theKiller.
Both are outlaws, even in the lawless seas.
Thus ends BOOK II.
(OCTAVO), and begins BOOK III.
(DUODECIMO).
DUODECIMOES.
--These include the smaller whales.
I.
The HuzzaPorpoise.
II.
The Algerine Porpoise.
III.
The Mealy-mouthedPorpoise.
To those who have not chanced specially to study the subject, it maypossibly seem strange, that fishes not commonly exceeding four orfive feet should be marshalled among WHALES--a word, which, in thepopular sense, always conveys an idea of hugeness.
But the creaturesset down above as Duodecimoes are infallibly whales, by the terms ofmy definition of what a whale is--i.
e.
a spouting fish, with ahorizontal tail.
common porpoise found almost all over the globe.
The name is of myown bestowal; for there are more than one sort of porpoises, andsomething must be done to distinguish them.
I call him thus, becausehe always swims in hilarious shoals, which upon the broad sea keeptossing themselves to heaven like caps in a Fourth-of-July crowd.
Their appearance is generally hailed with delight by the mariner.
Full of fine spirits, they invariably come from the breezy billows towindward.
They are the lads that always live before the wind.
Theyare accounted a lucky omen.
If you yourself can withstand threecheers at beholding these vivacious fish, then heaven help ye; thespirit of godly gamesomeness is not in ye.
A well-fed, plump HuzzaPorpoise will yield you one good gallon of good oil.
But the fineand delicate fluid extracted from his jaws is exceedingly valuable.
It is in request among jewellers and watchmakers.
Sailors put it ontheir hones.
Porpoise meat is good eating, you know.
It may neverhave occurred to you that a porpoise spouts.
Indeed, his spout is sosmall that it is not very readily discernible.
But the next time youhave a chance, watch him; and you will then see the great Sperm whalehimself in miniature.
Very savage.
He is only found, I think, in the Pacific.
He issomewhat larger than the Huzza Porpoise, but much of the same generalmake.
Provoke him, and he will buckle to a shark.
I have loweredfor him many times, but never yet saw him captured.
largest kind of Porpoise; and only found in the Pacific, so far as itis known.
The only English name, by which he has hitherto beendesignated, is that of the fishers--Right-Whale Porpoise, from thecircumstance that he is chiefly found in the vicinity of that Folio.
In shape, he differs in some degree from the Huzza Porpoise, being ofa less rotund and jolly girth; indeed, he is of quite a neat andgentleman-like figure.
He has no fins on his back (most otherporpoises have), he has a lovely tail, and sentimental Indian eyes ofa hazel hue.
But his mealy-mouth spoils all.
Though his entireback down to his side fins is of a deep sable, yet a boundary line,distinct as the mark in a ship's hull, called the "bright waist,"that line streaks him from stem to stern, with two separate colours,black above and white below.
The white comprises part of his head,and the whole of his mouth, which makes him look as if he had justescaped from a felonious visit to a meal-bag.
A most mean and mealyaspect! His oil is much like that of the common porpoise.
Beyond the DUODECIMO, this system does not proceed, inasmuch as thePorpoise is the smallest of the whales.
Above, you have all theLeviathans of note.
But there are a rabble of uncertain, fugitive,half-fabulous whales, which, as an American whaleman, I know byreputation, but not personally.
I shall enumerate them by theirfore-castle appellations; for possibly such a list may be valuable tofuture investigators, who may complete what I have here but begun.
If any of the following whales, shall hereafter be caught and marked,then he can readily be incorporated into this System, according tohis Folio, Octavo, or Duodecimo magnitude:--The Bottle-Nose Whale;the Junk Whale; the Pudding-Headed Whale; the Cape Whale; the LeadingWhale; the Cannon Whale; the Scragg Whale; the Coppered Whale; theElephant Whale; the Iceberg Whale; the Quog Whale; the Blue Whale; etc.
From Icelandic, Dutch, and old English authorities, there mightbe quoted other lists of uncertain whales, blessed with all manner ofuncouth names.
But I omit them as altogether obsolete; and canhardly help suspecting them for mere sounds, full of Leviathanism,but signifying nothing.
Finally: It was stated at the outset, that this system would not behere, and at once, perfected.
You cannot but plainly see that I havekept my word.
But I now leave my cetological System standing thusunfinished, even as the great Cathedral of Cologne was left, with thecrane still standing upon the top of the uncompleted tower.
Forsmall erections may be finished by their first architects; grandones, true ones, ever leave the copestone to posterity.
God keep mefrom ever completing anything.
This whole book is but adraught--nay, but the draught of a draught.
Oh, Time, Strength,Cash, and Patience!The Specksynder.
Concerning the officers of the whale-craft, this seems as good aplace as any to set down a little domestic peculiarity on ship-board,arising from the existence of the harpooneer class of officers, aclass unknown of course in any other marine than the whale-fleet.
The large importance attached to the harpooneer's vocation is evincedby the fact, that originally in the old Dutch Fishery, two centuriesand more ago, the command of a whale ship was not wholly lodged inthe person now called the captain, but was divided between him and anofficer called the Specksynder.
Literally this word meansFat-Cutter; usage, however, in time made it equivalent to ChiefHarpooneer.
In those days, the captain's authority was restricted tothe navigation and general management of the vessel; while over thewhale-hunting department and all its concerns, the Specksynder orChief Harpooneer reigned supreme.
In the British Greenland Fishery,under the corrupted title of Specksioneer, this old Dutch official isstill retained, but his former dignity is sadly abridged.
At presenthe ranks simply as senior Harpooneer; and as such, is but one of thecaptain's more inferior subalterns.
Nevertheless, as upon the goodconduct of the harpooneers the success of a whaling voyage largelydepends, and since in the American Fishery he is not only animportant officer in the boat, but under certain circumstances (nightwatches on a whaling ground) the command of the ship's deck is alsohis; therefore the grand political maxim of the sea demands, that heshould nominally live apart from the men before the mast, and be insome way distinguished as their professional superior; though always,by them, familiarly regarded as their social equal.
Now, the grand distinction drawn between officer and man at sea, isthis--the first lives aft, the last forward.
Hence, in whale-shipsand merchantmen alike, the mates have their quarters with thecaptain; and so, too, in most of the American whalers the harpooneersare lodged in the after part of the ship.
That is to say, they taketheir meals in the captain's cabin, and sleep in a place indirectlycommunicating with it.
Though the long period of a Southern whaling voyage (by far thelongest of all voyages now or ever made by man), the peculiar perilsof it, and the community of interest prevailing among a company, allof whom, high or low, depend for their profits, not upon fixed wages,but upon their common luck, together with their common vigilance,intrepidity, and hard work; though all these things do in some casestend to beget a less rigorous discipline than in merchantmengenerally; yet, never mind how much like an old Mesopotamian familythese whalemen may, in some primitive instances, live together; forall that, the punctilious externals, at least, of the quarter-deckare seldom materially relaxed, and in no instance done away.
Indeed,many are the Nantucket ships in which you will see the skipperparading his quarter-deck with an elated grandeur not surpassed inany military navy; nay, extorting almost as much outward homage as ifhe wore the imperial purple, and not the shabbiest of pilot-cloth.
And though of all men the moody captain of the Pequod was the leastgiven to that sort of shallowest assumption; and though the onlyhomage he ever exacted, was implicit, instantaneous obedience; thoughhe required no man to remove the shoes from his feet ere steppingupon the quarter-deck; and though there were times when, owing topeculiar circumstances connected with events hereafter to bedetailed, he addressed them in unusual terms, whether ofcondescension or IN TERROREM, or otherwise; yet even Captain Ahab wasby no means unobservant of the paramount forms and usages of the sea.
Nor, perhaps, will it fail to be eventually perceived, that behindthose forms and usages, as it were, he sometimes masked himself;incidentally making use of them for other and more private ends thanthey were legitimately intended to subserve.
That certain sultanismof his brain, which had otherwise in a good degree remainedunmanifested; through those forms that same sultanism becameincarnate in an irresistible dictatorship.
For be a man'sintellectual superiority what it will, it can never assume thepractical, available supremacy over other men, without the aid ofsome sort of external arts and entrenchments, always, in themselves,more or less paltry and base.
This it is, that for ever keeps God'strue princes of the Empire from the world's hustings; and leaves thehighest honours that this air can give, to those men who become famousmore through their infinite inferiority to the choice hidden handfulof the Divine Inert, than through their undoubted superiority overthe dead level of the mass.
Such large virtue lurks in these smallthings when extreme political superstitions invest them, that in someroyal instances even to idiot imbecility they have imparted potency.
But when, as in the case of Nicholas the Czar, the ringed crown ofgeographical empire encircles an imperial brain; then, the plebeianherds crouch abased before the tremendous centralization.
Nor, willthe tragic dramatist who would depict mortal indomitableness in itsfullest sweep and direct swing, ever forget a hint, incidentally soimportant in his art, as the one now alluded to.
But Ahab, my Captain, still moves before me in all his Nantucketgrimness and shagginess; and in this episode touching Emperors andKings, I must not conceal that I have only to do with a poor oldwhale-hunter like him; and, therefore, all outward majesticaltrappings and housings are denied me.
Oh, Ahab! what shall be grandin thee, it must needs be plucked at from the skies, and dived for inthe deep, and featured in the unbodied air!The Cabin-Table.
It is noon; and Dough-Boy, the steward, thrusting his paleloaf-of-bread face from the cabin-scuttle, announces dinner to hislord and master; who, sitting in the lee quarter-boat, has just beentaking an observation of the sun; and is now mutely reckoning thelatitude on the smooth, medallion-shaped tablet, reserved for thatdaily purpose on the upper part of his ivory leg.
From his completeinattention to the tidings, you would think that moody Ahab had notheard his menial.
But presently, catching hold of the mizen shrouds,he swings himself to the deck, and in an even, unexhilarated voice,saying, "Dinner, Mr.
Starbuck," disappears into the cabin.
When the last echo of his sultan's step has died away, and Starbuck,the first Emir, has every reason to suppose that he is seated, thenStarbuck rouses from his quietude, takes a few turns along theplanks, and, after a grave peep into the binnacle, says, with sometouch of pleasantness, "Dinner, Mr.
Stubb," and descends the scuttle.
The second Emir lounges about the rigging awhile, and then slightlyshaking the main brace, to see whether it will be all right withthat important rope, he likewise takes up the old burden, and with arapid "Dinner, Mr.
Flask," follows after his predecessors.
But the third Emir, now seeing himself all alone on the quarter-deck,seems to feel relieved from some curious restraint; for, tipping allsorts of knowing winks in all sorts of directions, and kicking offhis shoes, he strikes into a sharp but noiseless squall of a hornpiperight over the Grand Turk's head; and then, by a dexterous sleight,pitching his cap up into the mizentop for a shelf, he goes downrollicking so far at least as he remains visible from the deck,reversing all other processions, by bringing up the rear with music.
But ere stepping into the cabin doorway below, he pauses, ships a newface altogether, and, then, independent, hilarious little Flaskenters King Ahab's presence, in the character of Abjectus, or theSlave.
It is not the least among the strange things bred by the intenseartificialness of sea-usages, that while in the open air of the decksome officers will, upon provocation, bear themselves boldly anddefyingly enough towards their commander; yet, ten to one, let thosevery officers the next moment go down to their customary dinner inthat same commander's cabin, and straightway their inoffensive, notto say deprecatory and humble air towards him, as he sits at the headof the table; this is marvellous, sometimes most comical.
Whereforethis difference? A problem? Perhaps not.
To have been Belshazzar,King of Babylon; and to have been Belshazzar, not haughtily butcourteously, therein certainly must have been some touch of mundanegrandeur.
But he who in the rightly regal and intelligent spiritpresides over his own private dinner-table of invited guests, thatman's unchallenged power and dominion of individual influence for thetime; that man's royalty of state transcends Belshazzar's, forBelshazzar was not the greatest.
Who has but once dined his friends,has tasted what it is to be Caesar.
It is a witchery of socialczarship which there is no withstanding.
Now, if to thisconsideration you superadd the official supremacy of a ship-master,then, by inference, you will derive the cause of that peculiarity ofsea-life just mentioned.
Over his ivory-inlaid table, Ahab presided like a mute, manedsea-lion on the white coral beach, surrounded by his warlike butstill deferential cubs.
In his own proper turn, each officer waitedto be served.
They were as little children before Ahab; and yet, inAhab, there seemed not to lurk the smallest social arrogance.
Withone mind, their intent eyes all fastened upon the old man's knife, ashe carved the chief dish before him.
I do not suppose that for theworld they would have profaned that moment with the slightestobservation, even upon so neutral a topic as the weather.
No! Andwhen reaching out his knife and fork, between which the slice of beefwas locked, Ahab thereby motioned Starbuck's plate towards him, themate received his meat as though receiving alms; and cut it tenderly;and a little started if, perchance, the knife grazed against theplate; and chewed it noiselessly; and swallowed it, not withoutcircumspection.
For, like the Coronation banquet at Frankfort, wherethe German Emperor profoundly dines with the seven ImperialElectors, so these cabin meals were somehow solemn meals, eaten inawful silence; and yet at table old Ahab forbade not conversation;only he himself was dumb.
What a relief it was to choking Stubb,when a rat made a sudden racket in the hold below.
And poor littleFlask, he was the youngest son, and little boy of this weary familyparty.
His were the shinbones of the saline beef; his would havebeen the drumsticks.
For Flask to have presumed to help himself,this must have seemed to him tantamount to larceny in the firstdegree.
Had he helped himself at that table, doubtless, never morewould he have been able to hold his head up in this honest world;nevertheless, strange to say, Ahab never forbade him.
And had Flaskhelped himself, the chances were Ahab had never so much as noticedit.
Least of all, did Flask presume to help himself to butter.
Whether he thought the owners of the ship denied it to him, onaccount of its clotting his clear, sunny complexion; or whether hedeemed that, on so long a voyage in such marketless waters, butterwas at a premium, and therefore was not for him, a subaltern; howeverit was, Flask, alas! was a butterless man!Another thing.
Flask was the last person down at the dinner, andFlask is the first man up.
Consider! For hereby Flask's dinner wasbadly jammed in point of time.
Starbuck and Stubb both had the startof him; and yet they also have the privilege of lounging in the rear.
If Stubb even, who is but a peg higher than Flask, happens to havebut a small appetite, and soon shows symptoms of concluding hisrepast, then Flask must bestir himself, he will not get more thanthree mouthfuls that day; for it is against holy usage for Stubb toprecede Flask to the deck.
Therefore it was that Flask once admittedin private, that ever since he had arisen to the dignity of anofficer, from that moment he had never known what it was to beotherwise than hungry, more or less.
For what he ate did not so muchrelieve his hunger, as keep it immortal in him.
Peace andsatisfaction, thought Flask, have for ever departed from my stomach.
I am an officer; but, how I wish I could fish a bit of old-fashionedbeef in the forecastle, as I used to when I was before the mast.
There's the fruits of promotion now; there's the vanity of glory:there's the insanity of life! Besides, if it were so that any meresailor of the Pequod had a grudge against Flask in Flask's officialcapacity, all that sailor had to do, in order to obtain amplevengeance, was to go aft at dinner-time, and get a peep at Flaskthrough the cabin sky-light, sitting silly and dumfoundered beforeawful Ahab.
Now, Ahab and his three mates formed what may be called the firsttable in the Pequod's cabin.
After their departure, taking place ininverted order to their arrival, the canvas cloth was cleared, orrather was restored to some hurried order by the pallid steward.
Andthen the three harpooneers were bidden to the feast, they being itsresiduary legatees.
They made a sort of temporary servants' hall ofthe high and mighty cabin.
In strange contrast to the hardly tolerable constraint and namelessinvisible domineerings of the captain's table, was the entirecare-free license and ease, the almost frantic democracy of thoseinferior fellows the harpooneers.
While their masters, the mates,seemed afraid of the sound of the hinges of their own jaws, theharpooneers chewed their food with such a relish that there was areport to it.
They dined like lords; they filled their bellies likeIndian ships all day loading with spices.
Such portentous appetiteshad Queequeg and Tashtego, that to fill out the vacancies made by theprevious repast, often the pale Dough-Boy was fain to bring on agreat baron of salt-junk, seemingly quarried out of the solid ox.
And if he were not lively about it, if he did not go with a nimblehop-skip-and-jump, then Tashtego had an ungentlemanly way ofaccelerating him by darting a fork at his back, harpoon-wise.
Andonce Daggoo, seized with a sudden humor, assisted Dough-Boy's memoryby snatching him up bodily, and thrusting his head into a great emptywooden trencher, while Tashtego, knife in hand, began laying out thecircle preliminary to scalping him.
He was naturally a very nervous,shuddering sort of little fellow, this bread-faced steward; theprogeny of a bankrupt baker and a hospital nurse.
And what with thestanding spectacle of the black terrific Ahab, and the periodicaltumultuous visitations of these three savages, Dough-Boy's whole lifewas one continual lip-quiver.
Commonly, after seeing the harpooneersfurnished with all things they demanded, he would escape from theirclutches into his little pantry adjoining, and fearfully peep out atthem through the blinds of its door, till all was over.
It was a sight to see Queequeg seated over against Tashtego, opposinghis filed teeth to the Indian's: crosswise to them, Daggoo seated onthe floor, for a bench would have brought his hearse-plumed head tothe low carlines; at every motion of his colossal limbs, making thelow cabin framework to shake, as when an African elephant goespassenger in a ship.
But for all this, the great negro waswonderfully abstemious, not to say dainty.
It seemed hardly possiblethat by such comparatively small mouthfuls he could keep up thevitality diffused through so broad, baronial, and superb a person.
But, doubtless, this noble savage fed strong and drank deep of theabounding element of air; and through his dilated nostrils snuffed inthe sublime life of the worlds.
Not by beef or by bread, are giantsmade or nourished.
But Queequeg, he had a mortal, barbaric smack ofthe lip in eating--an ugly sound enough--so much so, that thetrembling Dough-Boy almost looked to see whether any marks of teethlurked in his own lean arms.
And when he would hear Tashtego singingout for him to produce himself, that his bones might be picked, thesimple-witted steward all but shattered the crockery hanging roundhim in the pantry, by his sudden fits of the palsy.
Nor did thewhetstone which the harpooneers carried in their pockets, for theirlances and other weapons; and with which whetstones, at dinner, theywould ostentatiously sharpen their knives; that grating sound did notat all tend to tranquillize poor Dough-Boy.
How could he forget thatin his Island days, Queequeg, for one, must certainly have beenguilty of some murderous, convivial indiscretions.
Alas! Dough-Boy!hard fares the white waiter who waits upon cannibals.
Not a napkinshould he carry on his arm, but a buckler.
In good time, though, tohis great delight, the three salt-sea warriors would rise and depart;to his credulous, fable-mongering ears, all their martial bonesjingling in them at every step, like Moorish scimetars in scabbards.
But, though these barbarians dined in the cabin, and nominally livedthere; still, being anything but sedentary in their habits, they werescarcely ever in it except at mealtimes, and just beforesleeping-time, when they passed through it to their own peculiarquarters.
In this one matter, Ahab seemed no exception to most American whalecaptains, who, as a set, rather incline to the opinion that by rightsthe ship's cabin belongs to them; and that it is by courtesy alonethat anybody else is, at any time, permitted there.
So that, in realtruth, the mates and harpooneers of the Pequod might more properly besaid to have lived out of the cabin than in it.
For when they didenter it, it was something as a street-door enters a house; turninginwards for a moment, only to be turned out the next; and, as apermanent thing, residing in the open air.
Nor did they lose muchhereby; in the cabin was no companionship; socially, Ahab wasinaccessible.
Though nominally included in the census ofChristendom, he was still an alien to it.
He lived in the world, asthe last of the Grisly Bears lived in settled Missouri.
And as whenSpring and Summer had departed, that wild Logan of the woods, buryinghimself in the hollow of a tree, lived out the winter there, suckinghis own paws; so, in his inclement, howling old age, Ahab's soul,shut up in the caved trunk of his body, there fed upon the sullenpaws of its gloom!The Mast-Head.
It was during the more pleasant weather, that in due rotation withthe other seamen my first mast-head came round.
In most American whalemen the mast-heads are manned almostsimultaneously with the vessel's leaving her port; even though shemay have fifteen thousand miles, and more, to sail ere reaching herproper cruising ground.
And if, after a three, four, or five years'voyage she is drawing nigh home with anything empty in her--say, anempty vial even--then, her mast-heads are kept manned to the last;and not till her skysail-poles sail in among the spires of the port,does she altogether relinquish the hope of capturing one whale more.
Now, as the business of standing mast-heads, ashore or afloat, is avery ancient and interesting one, let us in some measure expatiatehere.
I take it, that the earliest standers of mast-heads were theold Egyptians; because, in all my researches, I find none prior tothem.
For though their progenitors, the builders of Babel, mustdoubtless, by their tower, have intended to rear the loftiestmast-head in all Asia, or Africa either; yet (ere the final truck wasput to it) as that great stone mast of theirs may be said to havegone by the board, in the dread gale of God's wrath; therefore, wecannot give these Babel builders priority over the Egyptians.
Andthat the Egyptians were a nation of mast-head standers, is anassertion based upon the general belief among archaeologists, thatthe first pyramids were founded for astronomical purposes: a theorysingularly supported by the peculiar stair-like formation of all foursides of those edifices; whereby, with prodigious long upliftings oftheir legs, those old astronomers were wont to mount to the apex, andsing out for new stars; even as the look-outs of a modern ship singout for a sail, or a whale just bearing in sight.
In Saint Stylites,the famous Christian hermit of old times, who built him a lofty stonepillar in the desert and spent the whole latter portion of his lifeon its summit, hoisting his food from the ground with a tackle; inhim we have a remarkable instance of a dauntlessstander-of-mast-heads; who was not to be driven from his place byfogs or frosts, rain, hail, or sleet; but valiantly facing everythingout to the last, literally died at his post.
Of modernstanders-of-mast-heads we have but a lifeless set; mere stone, iron,and bronze men; who, though well capable of facing out a stiff gale,are still entirely incompetent to the business of singing out upondiscovering any strange sight.
There is Napoleon; who, upon the topof the column of Vendome, stands with arms folded, some one hundredand fifty feet in the air; careless, now, who rules the decks below;whether Louis Philippe, Louis Blanc, or Louis the Devil.
GreatWashington, too, stands high aloft on his towering main-mast inBaltimore, and like one of Hercules' pillars, his column marks thatpoint of human grandeur beyond which few mortals will go.
AdmiralNelson, also, on a capstan of gun-metal, stands his mast-head inTrafalgar Square; and ever when most obscured by that London smoke,token is yet given that a hidden hero is there; for where there issmoke, must be fire.
But neither great Washington, nor Napoleon, norNelson, will answer a single hail from below, however madly invokedto befriend by their counsels the distracted decks upon which theygaze; however it may be surmised, that their spirits penetratethrough the thick haze of the future, and descry what shoals and whatrocks must be shunned.
It may seem unwarrantable to couple in any respect the mast-headstanders of the land with those of the sea; but that in truth it isnot so, is plainly evinced by an item for which Obed Macy, the solehistorian of Nantucket, stands accountable.
The worthy Obed tellsus, that in the early times of the whale fishery, ere ships wereregularly launched in pursuit of the game, the people of that islanderected lofty spars along the sea-coast, to which the look-outsascended by means of nailed cleats, something as fowls go upstairs ina hen-house.
A few years ago this same plan was adopted by the Baywhalemen of New Zealand, who, upon descrying the game, gave notice tothe ready-manned boats nigh the beach.
But this custom has nowbecome obsolete; turn we then to the one proper mast-head, that of awhale-ship at sea.
The three mast-heads are kept manned fromsun-rise to sun-set; the seamen taking their regular turns (as at thehelm), and relieving each other every two hours.
In the sereneweather of the tropics it is exceedingly pleasant the mast-head; nay,to a dreamy meditative man it is delightful.
There you stand, ahundred feet above the silent decks, striding along the deep, as ifthe masts were gigantic stilts, while beneath you and between yourlegs, as it were, swim the hugest monsters of the sea, even as shipsonce sailed between the boots of the famous Colossus at old Rhodes.
There you stand, lost in the infinite series of the sea, with nothingruffled but the waves.
The tranced ship indolently rolls; the drowsytrade winds blow; everything resolves you into languor.
For the mostpart, in this tropic whaling life, a sublime uneventfulness investsyou; you hear no news; read no gazettes; extras with startlingaccounts of commonplaces never delude you into unnecessaryexcitements; you hear of no domestic afflictions; bankruptsecurities; fall of stocks; are never troubled with the thought ofwhat you shall have for dinner--for all your meals for three yearsand more are snugly stowed in casks, and your bill of fare isimmutable.
In one of those southern whalesmen, on a long three or four years'voyage, as often happens, the sum of the various hours you spend atthe mast-head would amount to several entire months.
And it is muchto be deplored that the place to which you devote so considerable aportion of the whole term of your natural life, should be so sadlydestitute of anything approaching to a cosy inhabitiveness, oradapted to breed a comfortable localness of feeling, such as pertainsto a bed, a hammock, a hearse, a sentry box, a pulpit, a coach, orany other of those small and snug contrivances in which mentemporarily isolate themselves.
Your most usual point of perch isthe head of the t' gallant-mast, where you stand upon two thinparallel sticks (almost peculiar to whalemen) called the t' gallantcross-trees.
Here, tossed about by the sea, the beginner feels aboutas cosy as he would standing on a bull's horns.
To be sure, in coldweather you may carry your house aloft with you, in the shape of awatch-coat; but properly speaking the thickest watch-coat is no moreof a house than the unclad body; for as the soul is glued inside ofits fleshy tabernacle, and cannot freely move about in it, nor evenmove out of it, without running great risk of perishing (like anignorant pilgrim crossing the snowy Alps in winter); so a watch-coatis not so much of a house as it is a mere envelope, or additionalskin encasing you.
You cannot put a shelf or chest of drawers inyour body, and no more can you make a convenient closet of yourwatch-coat.
Concerning all this, it is much to be deplored that the mast-heads ofa southern whale ship are unprovided with those enviable little tentsor pulpits, called CROW'S-NESTS, in which the look-outs of aGreenland whaler are protected from the inclement weather of thefrozen seas.
In the fireside narrative of Captain Sleet, entitled"A Voyage among the Icebergs, in quest of the Greenland Whale, andincidentally for the re-discovery of the Lost Icelandic Colonies ofOld Greenland;" in this admirable volume, all standers of mast-headsare furnished with a charmingly circumstantial account of the thenrecently invented CROW'S-NEST of the Glacier, which was the name ofCaptain Sleet's good craft.
He called it the SLEET'S CROW'S-NEST, inhonour of himself; he being the original inventor and patentee, andfree from all ridiculous false delicacy, and holding that if we callour own children after our own names (we fathers being the originalinventors and patentees), so likewise should we denominate afterourselves any other apparatus we may beget.
In shape, the Sleet'scrow's-nest is something like a large tierce or pipe; it is openabove, however, where it is furnished with a movable side-screen tokeep to windward of your head in a hard gale.
Being fixed on thesummit of the mast, you ascend into it through a little trap-hatch inthe bottom.
On the after side, or side next the stern of the ship,is a comfortable seat, with a locker underneath for umbrellas,comforters, and coats.
In front is a leather rack, in which to keepyour speaking trumpet, pipe, telescope, and other nauticalconveniences.
When Captain Sleet in person stood his mast-head inthis crow's-nest of his, he tells us that he always had a rifle withhim (also fixed in the rack), together with a powder flask and shot,for the purpose of popping off the stray narwhales, or vagrant seaunicorns infesting those waters; for you cannot successfully shoot atthem from the deck owing to the resistance of the water, but to shootdown upon them is a very different thing.
Now, it was plainly alabor of love for Captain Sleet to describe, as he does, all thelittle detailed conveniences of his crow's-nest; but though he soenlarges upon many of these, and though he treats us to a veryscientific account of his experiments in this crow's-nest, with asmall compass he kept there for the purpose of counteracting theerrors resulting from what is called the "local attraction" of allbinnacle magnets; an error ascribable to the horizontal vicinity ofthe iron in the ship's planks, and in the Glacier's case, perhaps, tothere having been so many broken-down blacksmiths among her crew; Isay, that though the Captain is very discreet and scientific here,yet, for all his learned "binnacle deviations," "azimuth compassobservations," and "approximate errors," he knows very well, CaptainSleet, that he was not so much immersed in those profound magneticmeditations, as to fail being attracted occasionally towards thatwell replenished little case-bottle, so nicely tucked in on one sideof his crow's nest, within easy reach of his hand.
Though, upon thewhole, I greatly admire and even love the brave, the honest, andlearned Captain; yet I take it very ill of him that he should soutterly ignore that case-bottle, seeing what a faithful friend andcomforter it must have been, while with mittened fingers and hoodedhead he was studying the mathematics aloft there in that bird's nestwithin three or four perches of the pole.
But if we Southern whale-fishers are not so snugly housed aloft asCaptain Sleet and his Greenlandmen were; yet that disadvantage isgreatly counter-balanced by the widely contrasting serenity of thoseseductive seas in which we South fishers mostly float.
For one, Iused to lounge up the rigging very leisurely, resting in the top tohave a chat with Queequeg, or any one else off duty whom I might findthere; then ascending a little way further, and throwing a lazy legover the top-sail yard, take a preliminary view of the waterypastures, and so at last mount to my ultimate destination.
Let me make a clean breast of it here, and frankly admit that I keptbut sorry guard.
With the problem of the universe revolving in me,how could I--being left completely to myself at such athought-engendering altitude--how could I but lightly hold myobligations to observe all whale-ships' standing orders, "Keep yourweather eye open, and sing out every time.
"And let me in this place movingly admonish you, ye ship-owners ofNantucket! Beware of enlisting in your vigilant fisheries any ladwith lean brow and hollow eye; given to unseasonable meditativeness;and who offers to ship with the Phaedon instead of Bowditch in hishead.
Beware of such an one, I say; your whales must be seen beforethey can be killed; and this sunken-eyed young Platonist will tow youten wakes round the world, and never make you one pint of sperm thericher.
Nor are these monitions at all unneeded.
For nowadays, thewhale-fishery furnishes an asylum for many romantic, melancholy, andabsent-minded young men, disgusted with the carking cares of earth,and seeking sentiment in tar and blubber.
Childe Harold notunfrequently perches himself upon the mast-head of some lucklessdisappointed whale-ship, and in moody phrase ejaculates:--"Roll on, thou deep and dark blue ocean, roll! Ten thousandblubber-hunters sweep over thee in vain.
"Very often do the captains of such ships take those absent-mindedyoung philosophers to task, upbraiding them with not feelingsufficient "interest" in the voyage; half-hinting that they are sohopelessly lost to all honourable ambition, as that in their secretsouls they would rather not see whales than otherwise.
But all invain; those young Platonists have a notion that their vision isimperfect; they are short-sighted; what use, then, to strain thevisual nerve? They have left their opera-glasses at home.
"Why, thou monkey," said a harpooneer to one of these lads, "we'vebeen cruising now hard upon three years, and thou hast not raised awhale yet.
Whales are scarce as hen's teeth whenever thou art uphere.
" Perhaps they were; or perhaps there might have been shoals ofthem in the far horizon; but lulled into such an opium-likelistlessness of vacant, unconscious reverie is this absent-mindedyouth by the blending cadence of waves with thoughts, that at last heloses his identity; takes the mystic ocean at his feet for thevisible image of that deep, blue, bottomless soul, pervading mankindand nature; and every strange, half-seen, gliding, beautiful thingthat eludes him; every dimly-discovered, uprising fin of someundiscernible form, seems to him the embodiment of those elusivethoughts that only people the soul by continually flitting throughit.
In this enchanted mood, thy spirit ebbs away to whence it came;becomes diffused through time and space; like Crammer's sprinkledPantheistic ashes, forming at last a part of every shore the roundglobe over.
There is no life in thee, now, except that rocking life imparted by agently rolling ship; by her, borrowed from the sea; by the sea, fromthe inscrutable tides of God.
But while this sleep, this dream is onye, move your foot or hand an inch; slip your hold at all; and youridentity comes back in horror.
Over Descartian vortices you hover.
And perhaps, at mid-day, in the fairest weather, with onehalf-throttled shriek you drop through that transparent air into thesummer sea, no more to rise for ever.
Heed it well, ye Pantheists!The Quarter-Deck.
(ENTER AHAB: THEN, ALL)It was not a great while after the affair of the pipe, that onemorning shortly after breakfast, Ahab, as was his wont, ascended thecabin-gangway to the deck.
There most sea-captains usually walk atthat hour, as country gentlemen, after the same meal, take a fewturns in the garden.
Soon his steady, ivory stride was heard, as to and fro he paced hisold rounds, upon planks so familiar to his tread, that they were allover dented, like geological stones, with the peculiar mark of hiswalk.
Did you fixedly gaze, too, upon that ribbed and dented brow;there also, you would see still stranger foot-prints--the foot-printsof his one unsleeping, ever-pacing thought.
But on the occasion in question, those dents looked deeper, even ashis nervous step that morning left a deeper mark.
And, so full ofhis thought was Ahab, that at every uniform turn that he made, now atthe main-mast and now at the binnacle, you could almost see thatthought turn in him as he turned, and pace in him as he paced; socompletely possessing him, indeed, that it all but seemed the inwardmould of every outer movement.
"D'ye mark him, Flask?" whispered Stubb; "the chick that's in himpecks the shell.
'Twill soon be out.
"The hours wore on;--Ahab now shut up within his cabin; anon, pacingthe deck, with the same intense bigotry of purpose in his aspect.
It drew near the close of day.
Suddenly he came to a halt by thebulwarks, and inserting his bone leg into the auger-hole there, andwith one hand grasping a shroud, he ordered Starbuck to sendeverybody aft.
"Sir!" said the mate, astonished at an order seldom or never given onship-board except in some extraordinary case.
"Send everybody aft," repeated Ahab.
"Mast-heads, there! come down!"When the entire ship's company were assembled, and with curious andnot wholly unapprehensive faces, were eyeing him, for he looked notunlike the weather horizon when a storm is coming up, Ahab, afterrapidly glancing over the bulwarks, and then darting his eyes amongthe crew, started from his standpoint; and as though not a soul werenigh him resumed his heavy turns upon the deck.
With bent head andhalf-slouched hat he continued to pace, unmindful of the wonderingwhispering among the men; till Stubb cautiously whispered to Flask,that Ahab must have summoned them there for the purpose of witnessinga pedestrian feat.
But this did not last long.
Vehemently pausing,he cried:--"What do ye do when ye see a whale, men?""Sing out for him!" was the impulsive rejoinder from a score ofclubbed voices.
"Good!" cried Ahab, with a wild approval in his tones; observing thehearty animation into which his unexpected question had somagnetically thrown them.
"And what do ye next, men?""Lower away, and after him!""And what tune is it ye pull to, men?""A dead whale or a stove boat!"More and more strangely and fiercely glad and approving, grew thecountenance of the old man at every shout; while the mariners beganto gaze curiously at each other, as if marvelling how it was thatthey themselves became so excited at such seemingly purposelessquestions.
But, they were all eagerness again, as Ahab, now half-revolving inhis pivot-hole, with one hand reaching high up a shroud, and tightly,almost convulsively grasping it, addressed them thus:--"All ye mast-headers have before now heard me give orders about awhite whale.
Look ye! d'ye see this Spanish ounce of gold?"--holdingup a broad bright coin to the sun--"it is a sixteen dollar piece,men.
D'ye see it? Mr.
Starbuck, hand me yon top-maul.
"While the mate was getting the hammer, Ahab, without speaking, wasslowly rubbing the gold piece against the skirts of his jacket, as ifto heighten its lustre, and without using any words was meanwhilelowly humming to himself, producing a sound so strangely muffled andinarticulate that it seemed the mechanical humming of the wheels ofhis vitality in him.
Receiving the top-maul from Starbuck, he advanced towards themain-mast with the hammer uplifted in one hand, exhibiting the goldwith the other, and with a high raised voice exclaiming: "Whosoeverof ye raises me a white-headed whale with a wrinkled brow and acrooked jaw; whosoever of ye raises me that white-headed whale, withthree holes punctured in his starboard fluke--look ye, whosoever ofye raises me that same white whale, he shall have this gold ounce, myboys!""Huzza! huzza!" cried the seamen, as with swinging tarpaulins theyhailed the act of nailing the gold to the mast.
"It's a white whale, I say," resumed Ahab, as he threw down thetopmaul: "a white whale.
Skin your eyes for him, men; look sharp forwhite water; if ye see but a bubble, sing out.
"All this while Tashtego, Daggoo, and Queequeg had looked on with evenmore intense interest and surprise than the rest, and at the mentionof the wrinkled brow and crooked jaw they had started as if each wasseparately touched by some specific recollection.
"Captain Ahab," said Tashtego, "that white whale must be the samethat some call Moby Dick.
""Moby Dick?" shouted Ahab.
"Do ye know the white whale then, Tash?""Does he fan-tail a little curious, sir, before he goes down?" saidthe Gay-Header deliberately.
"And has he a curious spout, too," said Daggoo, "very bushy, even fora parmacetty, and mighty quick, Captain Ahab?""And he have one, two, three--oh! good many iron in him hide, too,Captain," cried Queequeg disjointedly, "all twiske-tee be-twisk, likehim--him--" faltering hard for a word, and screwing his hand roundand round as though uncorking a bottle--"like him--him--""Corkscrew!" cried Ahab, "aye, Queequeg, the harpoons lie all twistedand wrenched in him; aye, Daggoo, his spout is a big one, like awhole shock of wheat, and white as a pile of our Nantucket wool afterthe great annual sheep-shearing; aye, Tashtego, and he fan-tails likea split jib in a squall.
Death and devils! men, it is Moby Dick yehave seen--Moby Dick--Moby Dick!""Captain Ahab," said Starbuck, who, with Stubb and Flask, had thusfar been eyeing his superior with increasing surprise, but at lastseemed struck with a thought which somewhat explained all the wonder.
"Captain Ahab, I have heard of Moby Dick--but it was not Moby Dickthat took off thy leg?""Who told thee that?" cried Ahab; then pausing, "Aye, Starbuck; aye,my hearties all round; it was Moby Dick that dismasted me; Moby Dickthat brought me to this dead stump I stand on now.
Aye, aye," heshouted with a terrific, loud, animal sob, like that of aheart-stricken moose; "Aye, aye! it was that accursed white whalethat razeed me; made a poor pegging lubber of me for ever and a day!"Then tossing both arms, with measureless imprecations he shoutedout: "Aye, aye! and I'll chase him round Good Hope, and round theHorn, and round the Norway Maelstrom, and round perdition's flamesbefore I give him up.
And this is what ye have shipped for, men! tochase that white whale on both sides of land, and over all sides ofearth, till he spouts black blood and rolls fin out.
What say ye,men, will ye splice hands on it, now? I think ye do look brave.
""Aye, aye!" shouted the harpooneers and seamen, running closer to theexcited old man: "A sharp eye for the white whale; a sharp lance forMoby Dick!""God bless ye," he seemed to half sob and half shout.
"God bless ye,men.
Steward! go draw the great measure of grog.
But what's thislong face about, Mr.
Starbuck; wilt thou not chase the white whale?art not game for Moby Dick?""I am game for his crooked jaw, and for the jaws of Death too,Captain Ahab, if it fairly comes in the way of the business wefollow; but I came here to hunt whales, not my commander's vengeance.
How many barrels will thy vengeance yield thee even if thou gettestit, Captain Ahab? it will not fetch thee much in our Nantucketmarket.
""Nantucket market! Hoot! But come closer, Starbuck; thou requiresta little lower layer.
If money's to be the measurer, man, and theaccountants have computed their great counting-house the globe, bygirdling it with guineas, one to every three parts of an inch; then,let me tell thee, that my vengeance will fetch a great premium HERE!""He smites his chest," whispered Stubb, "what's that for? methinks itrings most vast, but hollow.
""Vengeance on a dumb brute!" cried Starbuck, "that simply smote theefrom blindest instinct! Madness! To be enraged with a dumb thing,Captain Ahab, seems blasphemous.
""Hark ye yet again--the little lower layer.
All visible objects,man, are but as pasteboard masks.
But in each event--in the livingact, the undoubted deed--there, some unknown but still reasoningthing puts forth the mouldings of its features from behind theunreasoning mask.
If man will strike, strike through the mask! Howcan the prisoner reach outside except by thrusting through the wall?To me, the white whale is that wall, shoved near to me.
Sometimes Ithink there's naught beyond.
But 'tis enough.
He tasks me; he heapsme; I see in him outrageous strength, with an inscrutable malicesinewing it.
That inscrutable thing is chiefly what I hate; and bethe white whale agent, or be the white whale principal, I will wreakthat hate upon him.
Talk not to me of blasphemy, man; I'd strike thesun if it insulted me.
For could the sun do that, then could I dothe other; since there is ever a sort of fair play herein, jealousypresiding over all creations.
But not my master, man, is even thatfair play.
Who's over me? Truth hath no confines.
Take off thineeye! more intolerable than fiends' glarings is a doltish stare! So,so; thou reddenest and palest; my heat has melted thee to anger-glow.
But look ye, Starbuck, what is said in heat, that thing unsaysitself.
There are men from whom warm words are small indignity.
Imeant not to incense thee.
Let it go.
Look! see yonder Turkishcheeks of spotted tawn--living, breathing pictures painted by thesun.
The Pagan leopards--the unrecking and unworshipping things,that live; and seek, and give no reasons for the torrid life theyfeel! The crew, man, the crew! Are they not one and all with Ahab,in this matter of the whale? See Stubb! he laughs! See yonderChilian! he snorts to think of it.
Stand up amid the generalhurricane, thy one tost sapling cannot, Starbuck! And what is it?Reckon it.
'Tis but to help strike a fin; no wondrous feat forStarbuck.
What is it more? From this one poor hunt, then, the bestlance out of all Nantucket, surely he will not hang back, when everyforemast-hand has clutched a whetstone? Ah! constrainings seizethee; I see! the billow lifts thee! Speak, but speak!--Aye, aye! thysilence, then, THAT voices thee.
(ASIDE) Something shot from mydilated nostrils, he has inhaled it in his lungs.
Starbuck now ismine; cannot oppose me now, without rebellion.
""God keep me!--keep us all!" murmured Starbuck, lowly.
But in his joy at the enchanted, tacit acquiescence of the mate, Ahabdid not hear his foreboding invocation; nor yet the low laugh fromthe hold; nor yet the presaging vibrations of the winds in thecordage; nor yet the hollow flap of the sails against the masts, asfor a moment their hearts sank in.
For again Starbuck's downcasteyes lighted up with the stubbornness of life; the subterranean laughdied away; the winds blew on; the sails filled out; the ship heavedand rolled as before.
Ah, ye admonitions and warnings! why stay yenot when ye come? But rather are ye predictions than warnings, yeshadows! Yet not so much predictions from without, as verificationsof the foregoing things within.
For with little external toconstrain us, the innermost necessities in our being, these stilldrive us on.
"The measure! the measure!" cried Ahab.
Receiving the brimming pewter, and turning to the harpooneers, heordered them to produce their weapons.
Then ranging them before himnear the capstan, with their harpoons in their hands, while his threemates stood at his side with their lances, and the rest of the ship'scompany formed a circle round the group; he stood for an instantsearchingly eyeing every man of his crew.
But those wild eyes methis, as the bloodshot eyes of the prairie wolves meet the eye oftheir leader, ere he rushes on at their head in the trail of thebison; but, alas! only to fall into the hidden snare of the Indian.
"Drink and pass!" he cried, handing the heavy charged flagon to thenearest seaman.
"The crew alone now drink.
Round with it, round!Short draughts--long swallows, men; 'tis hot as Satan's hoof.
So,so; it goes round excellently.
It spiralizes in ye; forks out at theserpent-snapping eye.
Well done; almost drained.
That way it went,this way it comes.
Hand it me--here's a hollow! Men, ye seem theyears; so brimming life is gulped and gone.
Steward, refill!"Attend now, my braves.
I have mustered ye all round this capstan;and ye mates, flank me with your lances; and ye harpooneers, standthere with your irons; and ye, stout mariners, ring me in, that I mayin some sort revive a noble custom of my fisherman fathers beforeme.
O men, you will yet see that--Ha! boy, come back? bad penniescome not sooner.
Hand it me.
Why, now, this pewter had run brimmingagain, were't not thou St.
Vitus' imp--away, thou ague!"Advance, ye mates! Cross your lances full before me.
Well done!Let me touch the axis.
" So saying, with extended arm, he grasped thethree level, radiating lances at their crossed centre; while sodoing, suddenly and nervously twitched them; meanwhile, glancingintently from Starbuck to Stubb; from Stubb to Flask.
It seemed asthough, by some nameless, interior volition, he would fain haveshocked into them the same fiery emotion accumulated within theLeyden jar of his own magnetic life.
The three mates quailed beforehis strong, sustained, and mystic aspect.
Stubb and Flask lookedsideways from him; the honest eye of Starbuck fell downright.
"In vain!" cried Ahab; "but, maybe, 'tis well.
For did ye three butonce take the full-forced shock, then mine own electric thing, THAThad perhaps expired from out me.
Perchance, too, it would havedropped ye dead.
Perchance ye need it not.
Down lances! And now,ye mates, I do appoint ye three cupbearers to my three pagan kinsmenthere--yon three most honourable gentlemen and noblemen, my valiantharpooneers.
Disdain the task? What, when the great Pope washes thefeet of beggars, using his tiara for ewer? Oh, my sweet cardinals!your own condescension, THAT shall bend ye to it.
I do not order ye;ye will it.
Cut your seizings and draw the poles, ye harpooneers!"Silently obeying the order, the three harpooneers now stood with thedetached iron part of their harpoons, some three feet long, held,barbs up, before him.
"Stab me not with that keen steel! Cant them; cant them over! knowye not the goblet end? Turn up the socket! So, so; now, yecup-bearers, advance.
The irons! take them; hold them while I fill!"Forthwith, slowly going from one officer to the other, he brimmedthe harpoon sockets with the fiery waters from the pewter.
"Now, three to three, ye stand.
Commend the murderous chalices!Bestow them, ye who are now made parties to this indissoluble league.
Ha! Starbuck! but the deed is done! Yon ratifying sun now waits tosit upon it.
Drink, ye harpooneers! drink and swear, ye men that manthe deathful whaleboat's bow--Death to Moby Dick! God hunt us all,if we do not hunt Moby Dick to his death!" The long, barbed steelgoblets were lifted; and to cries and maledictions against the whitewhale, the spirits were simultaneously quaffed down with a hiss.
Starbuck paled, and turned, and shivered.
Once more, and finally,the replenished pewter went the rounds among the frantic crew; when,waving his free hand to them, they all dispersed; and Ahab retiredwithin his cabin.
Sunset.
THE CABIN; BY THE STERN WINDOWS; AHAB SITTING ALONE, AND GAZING OUT.
I leave a white and turbid wake; pale waters, paler cheeks, where'erI sail.
The envious billows sidelong swell to whelm my track; letthem; but first I pass.
Yonder, by ever-brimming goblet's rim, the warm waves blush likewine.
The gold brow plumbs the blue.
The diver sun--slow dived fromnoon--goes down; my soul mounts up! she wearies with her endlesshill.
Is, then, the crown too heavy that I wear? this Iron Crown ofLombardy.
Yet is it bright with many a gem; I the wearer, see notits far flashings; but darkly feel that I wear that, that dazzlinglyconfounds.
'Tis iron--that I know--not gold.
'Tis split, too--thatI feel; the jagged edge galls me so, my brain seems to beat againstthe solid metal; aye, steel skull, mine; the sort that needs nohelmet in the most brain-battering fight!Dry heat upon my brow? Oh! time was, when as the sunrise noblyspurred me, so the sunset soothed.
No more.
This lovely light, itlights not me; all loveliness is anguish to me, since I can ne'erenjoy.
Gifted with the high perception, I lack the low, enjoyingpower; damned, most subtly and most malignantly! damned in the midstof Paradise! Good night--good night! (WAVING HIS HAND, HE MOVES FROMTHE WINDOW.
)'Twas not so hard a task.
I thought to find one stubborn, at theleast; but my one cogged circle fits into all their various wheels,and they revolve.
Or, if you will, like so many ant-hills of powder,they all stand before me; and I their match.
Oh, hard! that to fireothers, the match itself must needs be wasting! What I've dared,I've willed; and what I've willed, I'll do! They think memad--Starbuck does; but I'm demoniac, I am madness maddened! Thatwild madness that's only calm to comprehend itself! The prophecy wasthat I should be dismembered; and--Aye! I lost this leg.
I nowprophesy that I will dismember my dismemberer.
Now, then, be theprophet and the fulfiller one.
That's more than ye, ye great gods,ever were.
I laugh and hoot at ye, ye cricket-players, ye pugilists,ye deaf Burkes and blinded Bendigoes! I will not say as schoolboysdo to bullies--Take some one of your own size; don't pommel ME! No,ye've knocked me down, and I am up again; but YE have run and hidden.
Come forth from behind your cotton bags! I have no long gun toreach ye.
Come, Ahab's compliments to ye; come and see if ye canswerve me.
Swerve me? ye cannot swerve me, else ye swerveyourselves! man has ye there.
Swerve me? The path to my fixedpurpose is laid with iron rails, whereon my soul is grooved to run.
Over unsounded gorges, through the rifled hearts of mountains, undertorrents' beds, unerringly I rush! Naught's an obstacle, naught's anangle to the iron way!Dusk.
BY THE MAINMAST; STARBUCK LEANING AGAINST IT.
My soul is more than matched; she's overmanned; and by a madman!Insufferable sting, that sanity should ground arms on such a field!But he drilled deep down, and blasted all my reason out of me! Ithink I see his impious end; but feel that I must help him to it.
Will I, nill I, the ineffable thing has tied me to him; tows me witha cable I have no knife to cut.
Horrible old man! Who's over him,he cries;--aye, he would be a democrat to all above; look, how helords it over all below! Oh! I plainly see my miserable office,--toobey, rebelling; and worse yet, to hate with touch of pity! For inhis eyes I read some lurid woe would shrivel me up, had I it.
Yet isthere hope.
Time and tide flow wide.
The hated whale has the roundwatery world to swim in, as the small gold-fish has its glassy globe.
His heaven-insulting purpose, God may wedge aside.
I would upheart, were it not like lead.
But my whole clock's run down; myheart the all-controlling weight, I have no key to lift again.
[A BURST OF REVELRY FROM THE FORECASTLE.
]Oh, God! to sail with such a heathen crew that have small touch ofhuman mothers in them! Whelped somewhere by the sharkish sea.
Thewhite whale is their demigorgon.
Hark! the infernal orgies! thatrevelry is forward! mark the unfaltering silence aft! Methinks itpictures life.
Foremost through the sparkling sea shoots on the gay,embattled, bantering bow, but only to drag dark Ahab after it, wherehe broods within his sternward cabin, builded over the dead water ofthe wake, and further on, hunted by its wolfish gurglings.
The longhowl thrills me through! Peace! ye revellers, and set the watch!Oh, life! 'tis in an hour like this, with soul beat down and held toknowledge,--as wild, untutored things are forced to feed--Oh, life!'tis now that I do feel the latent horror in thee! but 'tis not me!that horror's out of me! and with the soft feeling of the human inme, yet will I try to fight ye, ye grim, phantom futures! Stand byme, hold me, bind me, O ye blessed influences!First Night Watch.
Fore-Top.
(STUBB SOLUS, AND MENDING A BRACE.
)Ha! ha! ha! ha! hem! clear my throat!--I've been thinking over itever since, and that ha, ha's the final consequence.
Why so?Because a laugh's the wisest, easiest answer to all that's queer; andcome what will, one comfort's always left--that unfailing comfort is,it's all predestinated.
I heard not all his talk with Starbuck; butto my poor eye Starbuck then looked something as I the other eveningfelt.
Be sure the old Mogul has fixed him, too.
I twigged it, knewit; had had the gift, might readily have prophesied it--for when Iclapped my eye upon his skull I saw it.
Well, Stubb, WISEStubb--that's my title--well, Stubb, what of it, Stubb? Here's acarcase.
I know not all that may be coming, but be it what it will,I'll go to it laughing.
Such a waggish leering as lurks in all yourhorribles! I feel funny.
Fa, la! lirra, skirra! What's my juicylittle pear at home doing now? Crying its eyes out?--Giving a partyto the last arrived harpooneers, I dare say, gay as a frigate'spennant, and so am I--fa, la! lirra, skirra! Oh--We'll drink to-night with hearts as light,To love, as gay and fleetingAs bubbles that swim, on the beaker's brim,And break on the lips while meeting.
A brave stave that--who calls? Mr.
Starbuck? Aye, aye, sir--(ASIDE)he's my superior, he has his too, if I'm not mistaken.
--Aye, aye,sir, just through with this job--coming.
Midnight, Forecastle.
HARPOONEERS AND SAILORS.
(FORESAIL RISES AND DISCOVERS THE WATCH STANDING, LOUNGING, LEANING,AND LYING IN VARIOUS ATTITUDES, ALL SINGING IN CHORUS.
)Farewell and adieu to you, Spanish ladies!Farewell and adieu to you, ladies of Spain!Our captain's commanded.
--1ST NANTUCKET SAILOR.
Oh, boys, don't be sentimental; it's bad for the digestion! Take atonic, follow me!(SINGS, AND ALL FOLLOW)Our captain stood upon the deck,A spy-glass in his hand,A viewing of those gallant whalesThat blew at every strand.
Oh, your tubs in your boats, my boys,And by your braces stand,And we'll have one of those fine whales,Hand, boys, over hand!So, be cheery, my lads! may your hearts never fail!While the bold harpooner is striking the whale!MATE'S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK.
Eight bells there, forward!2ND NANTUCKET SAILOR.
Avast the chorus! Eight bells there! d'ye hear, bell-boy? Strikethe bell eight, thou Pip! thou blackling! and let me call the watch.
I've the sort of mouth for that--the hogshead mouth.
So, so,(THRUSTS HIS HEAD DOWN THE SCUTTLE,) Star-bo-l-e-e-n-s, a-h-o-y!Eight bells there below! Tumble up!DUTCH SAILOR.
Grand snoozing to-night, maty; fat night for that.
I mark this inour old Mogul's wine; it's quite as deadening to some as filliping toothers.
We sing; they sleep--aye, lie down there, like ground-tierbutts.
At 'em again! There, take this copper-pump, and hail 'emthrough it.
Tell 'em to avast dreaming of their lasses.
Tell 'emit's the resurrection; they must kiss their last, and come tojudgment.
That's the way--THAT'S it; thy throat ain't spoiled witheating Amsterdam butter.
FRENCH SAILOR.
Hist, boys! let's have a jig or two before we ride to anchor inBlanket Bay.
What say ye? There comes the other watch.
Stand byall legs! Pip! little Pip! hurrah with your tambourine!PIP.
(SULKY AND SLEEPY)Don't know where it is.
FRENCH SAILOR.
Beat thy belly, then, and wag thy ears.
Jig it, men, I say; merry'sthe word; hurrah! Damn me, won't you dance? Form, now, Indian-file,and gallop into the double-shuffle? Throw yourselves! Legs! legs!ICELAND SAILOR.
I don't like your floor, maty; it's too springy to my taste.
I'mused to ice-floors.
I'm sorry to throw cold water on the subject;but excuse me.
MALTESE SAILOR.
Me too; where's your girls? Who but a fool would take his left handby his right, and say to himself, how d'ye do? Partners! I musthave partners!SICILIAN SAILOR.
Aye; girls and a green!--then I'll hop with ye; yea, turngrasshopper!LONG-ISLAND SAILOR.
Well, well, ye sulkies, there's plenty more of us.
Hoe corn when youmay, say I.
All legs go to harvest soon.
Ah! here comes the music;now for it!AZORE SAILOR.
(ASCENDING, AND PITCHING THE TAMBOURINE UP THE SCUTTLE.
)Here you are, Pip; and there's the windlass-bitts; up you mount!Now, boys!(THE HALF OF THEM DANCE TO THE TAMBOURINE; SOME GO BELOW; SOME SLEEPOR LIE AMONG THE COILS OF RIGGING.
OATHS A-PLENTY.
)AZORE SAILOR.
(DANCING)Go it, Pip! Bang it, bell-boy! Rig it, dig it, stig it, quig it,bell-boy! Make fire-flies; break the jinglers!PIP.
Jinglers, you say?--there goes another, dropped off; I pound it so.
CHINA SAILOR.
Rattle thy teeth, then, and pound away; make a pagoda of thyself.
FRENCH SAILOR.
Merry-mad! Hold up thy hoop, Pip, till I jump through it! Splitjibs! tear yourselves!TASHTEGO.
(QUIETLY SMOKING)That's a white man; he calls that fun: humph! I save my sweat.
OLD MANX SAILOR.
I wonder whether those jolly lads bethink them of what they aredancing over.
I'll dance over your grave, I will--that's thebitterest threat of your night-women, that beat head-winds roundcorners.
O Christ! to think of the green navies and thegreen-skulled crews! Well, well; belike the whole world's a ball, asyou scholars have it; and so 'tis right to make one ballroom of it.
Dance on, lads, you're young; I was once.
3D NANTUCKET SAILOR.
Spell oh!--whew! this is worse than pulling after whales in acalm--give us a whiff, Tash.
(THEY CEASE DANCING, AND GATHER IN CLUSTERS.
MEANTIME THE SKYDARKENS--THE WIND RISES.
)LASCAR SAILOR.
By Brahma! boys, it'll be douse sail soon.
The sky-born, high-tideGanges turned to wind! Thou showest thy black brow, Seeva!MALTESE SAILOR.
(RECLINING AND SHAKING HIS CAP.
)It's the waves--the snow's caps turn to jig it now.
They'll shaketheir tassels soon.
Now would all the waves were women, then I'd godrown, and chassee with them evermore! There's naught so sweet onearth--heaven may not match it!--as those swift glances of warm, wildbosoms in the dance, when the over-arboring arms hide such ripe,bursting grapes.
SICILIAN SAILOR.
(RECLINING.
)Tell me not of it! Hark ye, lad--fleet interlacings of thelimbs--lithe swayings--coyings--flutterings! lip! heart! hip! allgraze: unceasing touch and go! not taste, observe ye, else comesatiety.
Eh, Pagan? (NUDGING.
)TAHITAN SAILOR.
(RECLINING ON A MAT.
)Hail, holy nakedness of our dancing girls!--the Heeva-Heeva! Ah! lowveiled, high palmed Tahiti! I still rest me on thy mat, but the softsoil has slid! I saw thee woven in the wood, my mat! green the firstday I brought ye thence; now worn and wilted quite.
Ah me!--not thounor I can bear the change! How then, if so be transplanted to yonsky? Hear I the roaring streams from Pirohitee's peak of spears,when they leap down the crags and drown the villages?--The blast! theblast! Up, spine, and meet it! (LEAPS TO HIS FEET.
)PORTUGUESE SAILOR.
How the sea rolls swashing 'gainst the side! Stand by for reefing,hearties! the winds are just crossing swords, pell-mell they'll golunging presently.
DANISH SAILOR.
Crack, crack, old ship! so long as thou crackest, thou holdest! Welldone! The mate there holds ye to it stiffly.
He's no more afraidthan the isle fort at Cattegat, put there to fight the Baltic withstorm-lashed guns, on which the sea-salt cakes!4TH NANTUCKET SAILOR.
He has his orders, mind ye that.
I heard old Ahab tell him he mustalways kill a squall, something as they burst a waterspout with apistol--fire your ship right into it!ENGLISH SAILOR.
Blood! but that old man's a grand old cove! We are the lads to hunthim up his whale!ALL.
Aye! aye!OLD MANX SAILOR.
How the three pines shake! Pines are the hardest sort of tree tolive when shifted to any other soil, and here there's none but thecrew's cursed clay.
Steady, helmsman! steady.
This is the sort ofweather when brave hearts snap ashore, and keeled hulls split at sea.
Our captain has his birthmark; look yonder, boys, there's another inthe sky--lurid-like, ye see, all else pitch black.
DAGGOO.
What of that? Who's afraid of black's afraid of me! I'm quarriedout of it!SPANISH SAILOR.
(ASIDE.
) He wants to bully, ah!--the old grudge makes me touchy(ADVANCING.
) Aye, harpooneer, thy race is the undeniable dark side ofmankind--devilish dark at that.
No offence.
DAGGOO (GRIMLY).
None.
ST.
JAGO'S SAILOR.
That Spaniard's mad or drunk.
But that can't be, or else in his onecase our old Mogul's fire-waters are somewhat long in working.
5TH NANTUCKET SAILOR.
What's that I saw--lightning? Yes.
SPANISH SAILOR.
No; Daggoo showing his teeth.
DAGGOO (SPRINGING).
Swallow thine, mannikin! White skin, white liver!SPANISH SAILOR (MEETING HIM).
Knife thee heartily! big frame, small spirit!ALL.
A row! a row! a row!TASHTEGO (WITH A WHIFF).
A row a'low, and a row aloft--Gods and men--both brawlers! Humph!BELFAST SAILOR.
A row! arrah a row! The Virgin be blessed, a row! Plunge in withye!ENGLISH SAILOR.
Fair play! Snatch the Spaniard's knife! A ring, a ring!OLD MANX SAILOR.
Ready formed.
There! the ringed horizon.
In that ring Cain struckAbel.
Sweet work, right work! No? Why then, God, mad'st thou thering?MATE'S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK.
Hands by the halyards! in top-gallant sails! Stand by to reeftopsails!ALL.
The squall! the squall! jump, my jollies! (THEY SCATTER.
)PIP (SHRINKING UNDER THE WINDLASS).
Jollies? Lord help such jollies! Crish, crash! there goes thejib-stay! Blang-whang! God! Duck lower, Pip, here comes the royalyard! It's worse than being in the whirled woods, the last day ofthe year! Who'd go climbing after chestnuts now? But there theygo, all cursing, and here I don't.
Fine prospects to 'em; they're onthe road to heaven.
Hold on hard! Jimmini, what a squall! Butthose chaps there are worse yet--they are your white squalls, they.
White squalls? white whale, shirr! shirr! Here have I heard alltheir chat just now, and the white whale--shirr! shirr!--but spokenof once! and only this evening--it makes me jingle all over like mytambourine--that anaconda of an old man swore 'em in to hunt him!Oh, thou big white God aloft there somewhere in yon darkness, havemercy on this small black boy down here; preserve him from all menthat have no bowels to feel fear!Moby Dick.
I, Ishmael, was one of that crew; my shouts had gone up with therest; my oath had been welded with theirs; and stronger I shouted,and more did I hammer and clinch my oath, because of the dread in mysoul.
A wild, mystical, sympathetical feeling was in me; Ahab'squenchless feud seemed mine.
With greedy ears I learned the historyof that murderous monster against whom I and all the others had takenour oaths of violence and revenge.
For some time past, though at intervals only, the unaccompanied,secluded White Whale had haunted those uncivilized seas mostlyfrequented by the Sperm Whale fishermen.
But not all of them knew ofhis existence; only a few of them, comparatively, had knowingly seenhim; while the number who as yet had actually and knowingly givenbattle to him, was small indeed.
For, owing to the large number ofwhale-cruisers; the disorderly way they were sprinkled over theentire watery circumference, many of them adventurously pushing theirquest along solitary latitudes, so as seldom or never for a wholetwelvemonth or more on a stretch, to encounter a single news-tellingsail of any sort; the inordinate length of each separate voyage; theirregularity of the times of sailing from home; all these, with othercircumstances, direct and indirect, long obstructed the spreadthrough the whole world-wide whaling-fleet of the specialindividualizing tidings concerning Moby Dick.
It was hardly to bedoubted, that several vessels reported to have encountered, at suchor such a time, or on such or such a meridian, a Sperm Whale ofuncommon magnitude and malignity, which whale, after doing greatmischief to his assailants, had completely escaped them; to someminds it was not an unfair presumption, I say, that the whale inquestion must have been no other than Moby Dick.
Yet as of late theSperm Whale fishery had been marked by various and not unfrequentinstances of great ferocity, cunning, and malice in the monsterattacked; therefore it was, that those who by accident ignorantlygave battle to Moby Dick; such hunters, perhaps, for the most part,were content to ascribe the peculiar terror he bred, more, as itwere, to the perils of the Sperm Whale fishery at large, than to theindividual cause.
In that way, mostly, the disastrous encounterbetween Ahab and the whale had hitherto been popularly regarded.
And as for those who, previously hearing of the White Whale, bychance caught sight of him; in the beginning of the thing they hadevery one of them, almost, as boldly and fearlessly lowered for him,as for any other whale of that species.
But at length, suchcalamities did ensue in these assaults--not restricted to sprainedwrists and ankles, broken limbs, or devouring amputations--but fatalto the last degree of fatality; those repeated disastrous repulses,all accumulating and piling their terrors upon Moby Dick; thosethings had gone far to shake the fortitude of many brave hunters, towhom the story of the White Whale had eventually come.
Nor did wild rumors of all sorts fail to exaggerate, and still themore horrify the true histories of these deadly encounters.
For notonly do fabulous rumors naturally grow out of the very body of allsurprising terrible events,--as the smitten tree gives birth to itsfungi; but, in maritime life, far more than in that of terra firma,wild rumors abound, wherever there is any adequate reality for themto cling to.
And as the sea surpasses the land in this matter, sothe whale fishery surpasses every other sort of maritime life, in thewonderfulness and fearfulness of the rumors which sometimes circulatethere.
For not only are whalemen as a body unexempt from thatignorance and superstitiousness hereditary to all sailors; but of allsailors, they are by all odds the most directly brought into contactwith whatever is appallingly astonishing in the sea; face to facethey not only eye its greatest marvels, but, hand to jaw, give battleto them.
Alone, in such remotest waters, that though you sailed athousand miles, and passed a thousand shores, you would not come toany chiseled hearth-stone, or aught hospitable beneath that part ofthe sun; in such latitudes and longitudes, pursuing too such acalling as he does, the whaleman is wrapped by influences all tendingto make his fancy pregnant with many a mighty birth.
No wonder, then, that ever gathering volume from the mere transitover the widest watery spaces, the outblown rumors of the White Whaledid in the end incorporate with themselves all manner of morbidhints, and half-formed foetal suggestions of supernatural agencies,which eventually invested Moby Dick with new terrors unborrowed fromanything that visibly appears.
So that in many cases such a panicdid he finally strike, that few who by those rumors, at least, hadheard of the White Whale, few of those hunters were willing toencounter the perils of his jaw.
But there were still other and more vital practical influences atwork.
Not even at the present day has the original prestige of theSperm Whale, as fearfully distinguished from all other species of theleviathan, died out of the minds of the whalemen as a body.
Thereare those this day among them, who, though intelligent and courageousenough in offering battle to the Greenland or Right whale, wouldperhaps--either from professional inexperience, or incompetency, ortimidity, decline a contest with the Sperm Whale; at any rate, thereare plenty of whalemen, especially among those whaling nations notsailing under the American flag, who have never hostilely encounteredthe Sperm Whale, but whose sole knowledge of the leviathan isrestricted to the ignoble monster primitively pursued in the North;seated on their hatches, these men will hearken with a childishfireside interest and awe, to the wild, strange tales of Southernwhaling.
Nor is the pre-eminent tremendousness of the great SpermWhale anywhere more feelingly comprehended, than on board of thoseprows which stem him.
And as if the now tested reality of his might had in former legendarytimes thrown its shadow before it; we find some booknaturalists--Olassen and Povelson--declaring the Sperm Whale not onlyto be a consternation to every other creature in the sea, but also tobe so incredibly ferocious as continually to be athirst for humanblood.
Nor even down to so late a time as Cuvier's, were these oralmost similar impressions effaced.
For in his Natural History, theBaron himself affirms that at sight of the Sperm Whale, all fish(sharks included) are "struck with the most lively terrors," and"often in the precipitancy of their flight dash themselves againstthe rocks with such violence as to cause instantaneous death.
" Andhowever the general experiences in the fishery may amend such reportsas these; yet in their full terribleness, even to the bloodthirstyitem of Povelson, the superstitious belief in them is, in somevicissitudes of their vocation, revived in the minds of the hunters.
So that overawed by the rumors and portents concerning him, not a fewof the fishermen recalled, in reference to Moby Dick, the earlierdays of the Sperm Whale fishery, when it was oftentimes hard toinduce long practised Right whalemen to embark in the perils of thisnew and daring warfare; such men protesting that although otherleviathans might be hopefully pursued, yet to chase and point lanceat such an apparition as the Sperm Whale was not for mortal man.
That to attempt it, would be inevitably to be torn into a quicketernity.
On this head, there are some remarkable documents that maybe consulted.
Nevertheless, some there were, who even in the face of these thingswere ready to give chase to Moby Dick; and a still greater numberwho, chancing only to hear of him distantly and vaguely, without thespecific details of any certain calamity, and without superstitiousaccompaniments, were sufficiently hardy not to flee from the battleif offered.
One of the wild suggestions referred to, as at last coming to belinked with the White Whale in the minds of the superstitiouslyinclined, was the unearthly conceit that Moby Dick was ubiquitous;that he had actually been encountered in opposite latitudes at oneand the same instant of time.
Nor, credulous as such minds must have been, was this conceitaltogether without some faint show of superstitious probability.
Foras the secrets of the currents in the seas have never yet beendivulged, even to the most erudite research; so the hidden ways ofthe Sperm Whale when beneath the surface remain, in great part,unaccountable to his pursuers; and from time to time have originatedthe most curious and contradictory speculations regarding them,especially concerning the mystic modes whereby, after sounding to agreat depth, he transports himself with such vast swiftness to themost widely distant points.
It is a thing well known to both American and English whale-ships,and as well a thing placed upon authoritative record years ago byScoresby, that some whales have been captured far north in thePacific, in whose bodies have been found the barbs of harpoons dartedin the Greenland seas.
Nor is it to be gainsaid, that in some ofthese instances it has been declared that the interval of timebetween the two assaults could not have exceeded very many days.
Hence, by inference, it has been believed by some whalemen, that theNor' West Passage, so long a problem to man, was never a problem tothe whale.
So that here, in the real living experience of livingmen, the prodigies related in old times of the inland Strellomountain in Portugal (near whose top there was said to be a lake inwhich the wrecks of ships floated up to the surface); and that stillmore wonderful story of the Arethusa fountain near Syracuse (whosewaters were believed to have come from the Holy Land by anunderground passage); these fabulous narrations are almost fullyequalled by the realities of the whalemen.
Forced into familiarity, then, with such prodigies as these; andknowing that after repeated, intrepid assaults, the White Whale hadescaped alive; it cannot be much matter of surprise that somewhalemen should go still further in their superstitions; declaringMoby Dick not only ubiquitous, but immortal (for immortality is butubiquity in time); that though groves of spears should be planted inhis flanks, he would still swim away unharmed; or if indeed he shouldever be made to spout thick blood, such a sight would be but aghastly deception; for again in unensanguined billows hundreds ofleagues away, his unsullied jet would once more be seen.
But even stripped of these supernatural surmisings, there was enoughin the earthly make and incontestable character of the monster tostrike the imagination with unwonted power.
For, it was not so muchhis uncommon bulk that so much distinguished him from other spermwhales, but, as was elsewhere thrown out--a peculiar snow-whitewrinkled forehead, and a high, pyramidical white hump.
These werehis prominent features; the tokens whereby, even in the limitless,uncharted seas, he revealed his identity, at a long distance, tothose who knew him.
The rest of his body was so streaked, and spotted, and marbled withthe same shrouded hue, that, in the end, he had gained hisdistinctive appellation of the White Whale; a name, indeed, literallyjustified by his vivid aspect, when seen gliding at high noon througha dark blue sea, leaving a milky-way wake of creamy foam, allspangled with golden gleamings.
Nor was it his unwonted magnitude, nor his remarkable hue, nor yethis deformed lower jaw, that so much invested the whale with naturalterror, as that unexampled, intelligent malignity which, according tospecific accounts, he had over and over again evinced in hisassaults.
More than all, his treacherous retreats struck more ofdismay than perhaps aught else.
For, when swimming before hisexulting pursuers, with every apparent symptom of alarm, he hadseveral times been known to turn round suddenly, and, bearing downupon them, either stave their boats to splinters, or drive them backin consternation to their ship.
Already several fatalities had attended his chase.
But thoughsimilar disasters, however little bruited ashore, were by no meansunusual in the fishery; yet, in most instances, such seemed the WhiteWhale's infernal aforethought of ferocity, that every dismembering ordeath that he caused, was not wholly regarded as having beeninflicted by an unintelligent agent.
Judge, then, to what pitches of inflamed, distracted fury the mindsof his more desperate hunters were impelled, when amid the chips ofchewed boats, and the sinking limbs of torn comrades, they swam outof the white curds of the whale's direful wrath into the serene,exasperating sunlight, that smiled on, as if at a birth or a bridal.
His three boats stove around him, and oars and men both whirling inthe eddies; one captain, seizing the line-knife from his broken prow,had dashed at the whale, as an Arkansas duellist at his foe, blindlyseeking with a six inch blade to reach the fathom-deep life of thewhale.
That captain was Ahab.
And then it was, that suddenlysweeping his sickle-shaped lower jaw beneath him, Moby Dick hadreaped away Ahab's leg, as a mower a blade of grass in the field.
Noturbaned Turk, no hired Venetian or Malay, could have smote him withmore seeming malice.
Small reason was there to doubt, then, thatever since that almost fatal encounter, Ahab had cherished a wildvindictiveness against the whale, all the more fell for that in hisfrantic morbidness he at last came to identify with him, not only allhis bodily woes, but all his intellectual and spiritualexasperations.
The White Whale swam before him as the monomaniacincarnation of all those malicious agencies which some deep men feeleating in them, till they are left living on with half a heart andhalf a lung.
That intangible malignity which has been from thebeginning; to whose dominion even the modern Christians ascribeone-half of the worlds; which the ancient Ophites of the eastreverenced in their statue devil;--Ahab did not fall down and worshipit like them; but deliriously transferring its idea to the abhorredwhite whale, he pitted himself, all mutilated, against it.
All thatmost maddens and torments; all that stirs up the lees of things; alltruth with malice in it; all that cracks the sinews and cakes thebrain; all the subtle demonisms of life and thought; all evil, tocrazy Ahab, were visibly personified, and made practically assailablein Moby Dick.
He piled upon the whale's white hump the sum of allthe general rage and hate felt by his whole race from Adam down; andthen, as if his chest had been a mortar, he burst his hot heart'sshell upon it.
It is not probable that this monomania in him took its instant riseat the precise time of his bodily dismemberment.
Then, in darting atthe monster, knife in hand, he had but given loose to a sudden,passionate, corporal animosity; and when he received the stroke thattore him, he probably but felt the agonizing bodily laceration, butnothing more.
Yet, when by this collision forced to turn towardshome, and for long months of days and weeks, Ahab and anguish laystretched together in one hammock, rounding in mid winter thatdreary, howling Patagonian Cape; then it was, that his torn body andgashed soul bled into one another; and so interfusing, made him mad.
That it was only then, on the homeward voyage, after the encounter,that the final monomania seized him, seems all but certain from thefact that, at intervals during the passage, he was a raving lunatic;and, though unlimbed of a leg, yet such vital strength yet lurked inhis Egyptian chest, and was moreover intensified by his delirium,that his mates were forced to lace him fast, even there, as hesailed, raving in his hammock.
In a strait-jacket, he swung to themad rockings of the gales.
And, when running into more sufferablelatitudes, the ship, with mild stun'sails spread, floated across thetranquil tropics, and, to all appearances, the old man's deliriumseemed left behind him with the Cape Horn swells, and he came forthfrom his dark den into the blessed light and air; even then, when hebore that firm, collected front, however pale, and issued his calmorders once again; and his mates thanked God the direful madness wasnow gone; even then, Ahab, in his hidden self, raved on.
Humanmadness is oftentimes a cunning and most feline thing.
When youthink it fled, it may have but become transfigured into some stillsubtler form.
Ahab's full lunacy subsided not, but deepeninglycontracted; like the unabated Hudson, when that noble Northman flowsnarrowly, but unfathomably through the Highland gorge.
But, as inhis narrow-flowing monomania, not one jot of Ahab's broad madness hadbeen left behind; so in that broad madness, not one jot of his greatnatural intellect had perished.
That before living agent, now becamethe living instrument.
If such a furious trope may stand, hisspecial lunacy stormed his general sanity, and carried it, and turnedall its concentred cannon upon its own mad mark; so that far fromhaving lost his strength, Ahab, to that one end, did now possess athousand fold more potency than ever he had sanely brought to bearupon any one reasonable object.
This is much; yet Ahab's larger, darker, deeper part remainsunhinted.
But vain to popularize profundities, and all truth isprofound.
Winding far down from within the very heart of this spikedHotel de Cluny where we here stand--however grand and wonderful, nowquit it;--and take your way, ye nobler, sadder souls, to those vastRoman halls of Thermes; where far beneath the fantastic towers ofman's upper earth, his root of grandeur, his whole awful essence sitsin bearded state; an antique buried beneath antiquities, and thronedon torsoes! So with a broken throne, the great gods mock thatcaptive king; so like a Caryatid, he patient sits, upholding on hisfrozen brow the piled entablatures of ages.
Wind ye down there, yeprouder, sadder souls! question that proud, sad king! A familylikeness! aye, he did beget ye, ye young exiled royalties; and fromyour grim sire only will the old State-secret come.
Now, in his heart, Ahab had some glimpse of this, namely: all mymeans are sane, my motive and my object mad.
Yet without power tokill, or change, or shun the fact; he likewise knew that to mankindhe did long dissemble; in some sort, did still.
But that thing ofhis dissembling was only subject to his perceptibility, not to hiswill determinate.
Nevertheless, so well did he succeed in thatdissembling, that when with ivory leg he stepped ashore at last, noNantucketer thought him otherwise than but naturally grieved, andthat to the quick, with the terrible casualty which had overtakenhim.
The report of his undeniable delirium at sea was likewise popularlyascribed to a kindred cause.
And so too, all the added moodinesswhich always afterwards, to the very day of sailing in the Pequod onthe present voyage, sat brooding on his brow.
Nor is it so veryunlikely, that far from distrusting his fitness for another whalingvoyage, on account of such dark symptoms, the calculating people ofthat prudent isle were inclined to harbor the conceit, that for thosevery reasons he was all the better qualified and set on edge, for apursuit so full of rage and wildness as the bloody hunt of whales.
Gnawed within and scorched without, with the infixed, unrelentingfangs of some incurable idea; such an one, could he be found, wouldseem the very man to dart his iron and lift his lance against themost appalling of all brutes.
Or, if for any reason thought to becorporeally incapacitated for that, yet such an one would seemsuperlatively competent to cheer and howl on his underlings to theattack.
But be all this as it may, certain it is, that with the madsecret of his unabated rage bolted up and keyed in him, Ahab hadpurposely sailed upon the present voyage with the one only andall-engrossing object of hunting the White Whale.
Had any one of hisold acquaintances on shore but half dreamed of what was lurking inhim then, how soon would their aghast and righteous souls havewrenched the ship from such a fiendish man! They were bent onprofitable cruises, the profit to be counted down in dollars from themint.
He was intent on an audacious, immitigable, and supernaturalrevenge.
Here, then, was this grey-headed, ungodly old man, chasing withcurses a Job's whale round the world, at the head of a crew, too,chiefly made up of mongrel renegades, and castaways, andcannibals--morally enfeebled also, by the incompetence of mereunaided virtue or right-mindedness in Starbuck, the invunerablejollity of indifference and recklessness in Stubb, and the pervadingmediocrity in Flask.
Such a crew, so officered, seemed speciallypicked and packed by some infernal fatality to help him to hismonomaniac revenge.
How it was that they so aboundingly responded tothe old man's ire--by what evil magic their souls were possessed,that at times his hate seemed almost theirs; the White Whale as muchtheir insufferable foe as his; how all this came to be--what theWhite Whale was to them, or how to their unconscious understandings,also, in some dim, unsuspected way, he might have seemed the glidinggreat demon of the seas of life,--all this to explain, would be todive deeper than Ishmael can go.
The subterranean miner that worksin us all, how can one tell whither leads his shaft by the evershifting, muffled sound of his pick? Who does not feel theirresistible arm drag? What skiff in tow of a seventy-four can standstill? For one, I gave myself up to the abandonment of the time andthe place; but while yet all a-rush to encounter the whale, could seenaught in that brute but the deadliest ill.
The Whiteness of The Whale.
What the white whale was to Ahab, has been hinted; what, at times, hewas to me, as yet remains unsaid.
Aside from those more obvious considerations touching Moby Dick,which could not but occasionally awaken in any man's soul some alarm,there was another thought, or rather vague, nameless horrorconcerning him, which at times by its intensity completelyoverpowered all the rest; and yet so mystical and well nigh ineffablewas it, that I almost despair of putting it in a comprehensible form.
It was the whiteness of the whale that above all things appalled me.
But how can I hope to explain myself here; and yet, in some dim,random way, explain myself I must, else all these chapters might benaught.
Though in many natural objects, whiteness refiningly enhances beauty,as if imparting some special virtue of its own, as in marbles,japonicas, and pearls; and though various nations have in some wayrecognised a certain royal preeminence in this hue; even thebarbaric, grand old kings of Pegu placing the title "Lord of theWhite Elephants" above all their other magniloquent ascriptions ofdominion; and the modern kings of Siam unfurling the same snow-whitequadruped in the royal standard; and the Hanoverian flag bearing theone figure of a snow-white charger; and the great Austrian Empire,Caesarian, heir to overlording Rome, having for the imperial colourthe same imperial hue; and though this pre-eminence in it applies tothe human race itself, giving the white man ideal mastership overevery dusky tribe; and though, besides, all this, whiteness has beeneven made significant of gladness, for among the Romans a white stonemarked a joyful day; and though in other mortal sympathies andsymbolizings, this same hue is made the emblem of many touching,noble things--the innocence of brides, the benignity of age; thoughamong the Red Men of America the giving of the white belt of wampumwas the deepest pledge of honour; though in many climes, whitenesstypifies the majesty of Justice in the ermine of the Judge, andcontributes to the daily state of kings and queens drawn bymilk-white steeds; though even in the higher mysteries of the mostaugust religions it has been made the symbol of the divinespotlessness and power; by the Persian fire worshippers, the whiteforked flame being held the holiest on the altar; and in the Greekmythologies, Great Jove himself being made incarnate in a snow-whitebull; and though to the noble Iroquois, the midwinter sacrifice ofthe sacred White Dog was by far the holiest festival of theirtheology, that spotless, faithful creature being held the purestenvoy they could send to the Great Spirit with the annual tidings oftheir own fidelity; and though directly from the Latin word forwhite, all Christian priests derive the name of one part of theirsacred vesture, the alb or tunic, worn beneath the cassock; andthough among the holy pomps of the Romish faith, white is speciallyemployed in the celebration of the Passion of our Lord; though in theVision of St.
John, white robes are given to the redeemed, and thefour-and-twenty elders stand clothed in white before the great-whitethrone, and the Holy One that sitteth there white like wool; yet forall these accumulated associations, with whatever is sweet, andhonourable, and sublime, there yet lurks an elusive something in theinnermost idea of this hue, which strikes more of panic to the soulthan that redness which affrights in blood.
This elusive quality it is, which causes the thought of whiteness,when divorced from more kindly associations, and coupled with anyobject terrible in itself, to heighten that terror to the furthestbounds.
Witness the white bear of the poles, and the white shark ofthe tropics; what but their smooth, flaky whiteness makes them thetranscendent horrors they are? That ghastly whiteness it is whichimparts such an abhorrent mildness, even more loathsome thanterrific, to the dumb gloating of their aspect.
So that not thefierce-fanged tiger in his heraldic coat can so stagger courage asthe white-shrouded bear or shark.
**With reference to the Polar bear, it may possibly be urged by himwho would fain go still deeper into this matter, that it is not thewhiteness, separately regarded, which heightens the intolerablehideousness of that brute; for, analysed, that heightenedhideousness, it might be said, only rises from the circumstance, thatthe irresponsible ferociousness of the creature stands invested inthe fleece of celestial innocence and love; and hence, by bringingtogether two such opposite emotions in our minds, the Polar bearfrightens us with so unnatural a contrast.
But even assuming allthis to be true; yet, were it not for the whiteness, you would nothave that intensified terror.
As for the white shark, the white gliding ghostliness of repose inthat creature, when beheld in his ordinary moods, strangely tallieswith the same quality in the Polar quadruped.
This peculiarity ismost vividly hit by the French in the name they bestow upon thatfish.
The Romish mass for the dead begins with "Requiem eternam"(eternal rest), whence REQUIEM denominating the mass itself, and anyother funeral music.
Now, in allusion to the white, silent stillnessof death in this shark, and the mild deadliness of his habits, theFrench call him REQUIN.
Bethink thee of the albatross, whence come those clouds of spiritualwonderment and pale dread, in which that white phantom sails in allimaginations? Not Coleridge first threw that spell; but God's great,unflattering laureate, Nature.
**I remember the first albatross I ever saw.
It was during aprolonged gale, in waters hard upon the Antarctic seas.
From myforenoon watch below, I ascended to the overclouded deck; and there,dashed upon the main hatches, I saw a regal, feathery thing ofunspotted whiteness, and with a hooked, Roman bill sublime.
Atintervals, it arched forth its vast archangel wings, as if to embracesome holy ark.
Wondrous flutterings and throbbings shook it.
Thoughbodily unharmed, it uttered cries, as some king's ghost insupernatural distress.
Through its inexpressible, strange eyes,methought I peeped to secrets which took hold of God.
As Abrahambefore the angels, I bowed myself; the white thing was so white, itswings so wide, and in those for ever exiled waters, I had lost themiserable warping memories of traditions and of towns.
Long I gazedat that prodigy of plumage.
I cannot tell, can only hint, the thingsthat darted through me then.
But at last I awoke; and turning, askeda sailor what bird was this.
A goney, he replied.
Goney! never hadheard that name before; is it conceivable that this glorious thing isutterly unknown to men ashore! never! But some time after, I learnedthat goney was some seaman's name for albatross.
So that by nopossibility could Coleridge's wild Rhyme have had aught to do withthose mystical impressions which were mine, when I saw that bird uponour deck.
For neither had I then read the Rhyme, nor knew the birdto be an albatross.
Yet, in saying this, I do but indirectly burnisha little brighter the noble merit of the poem and the poet.
I assert, then, that in the wondrous bodily whiteness of the birdchiefly lurks the secret of the spell; a truth the more evinced inthis, that by a solecism of terms there are birds called greyalbatrosses; and these I have frequently seen, but never with suchemotions as when I beheld the Antarctic fowl.
But how had the mystic thing been caught? Whisper it not, and I willtell; with a treacherous hook and line, as the fowl floated on thesea.
At last the Captain made a postman of it; tying a lettered,leathern tally round its neck, with the ship's time and place; andthen letting it escape.
But I doubt not, that leathern tally, meantfor man, was taken off in Heaven, when the white fowl flew to jointhe wing-folding, the invoking, and adoring cherubim!Most famous in our Western annals and Indian traditions is that ofthe White Steed of the Prairies; a magnificent milk-white charger,large-eyed, small-headed, bluff-chested, and with the dignity of athousand monarchs in his lofty, overscorning carriage.
He was theelected Xerxes of vast herds of wild horses, whose pastures in thosedays were only fenced by the Rocky Mountains and the Alleghanies.
Attheir flaming head he westward trooped it like that chosen star whichevery evening leads on the hosts of light.
The flashing cascade ofhis mane, the curving comet of his tail, invested him with housingsmore resplendent than gold and silver-beaters could have furnishedhim.
A most imperial and archangelical apparition of that unfallen,western world, which to the eyes of the old trappers and huntersrevived the glories of those primeval times when Adam walked majesticas a god, bluff-browed and fearless as this mighty steed.
Whethermarching amid his aides and marshals in the van of countless cohortsthat endlessly streamed it over the plains, like an Ohio; or whetherwith his circumambient subjects browsing all around at the horizon,the White Steed gallopingly reviewed them with warm nostrilsreddening through his cool milkiness; in whatever aspect he presentedhimself, always to the bravest Indians he was the object of tremblingreverence and awe.
Nor can it be questioned from what stands onlegendary record of this noble horse, that it was his spiritualwhiteness chiefly, which so clothed him with divineness; and thatthis divineness had that in it which, though commanding worship, atthe same time enforced a certain nameless terror.
But there are other instances where this whiteness loses all thataccessory and strange glory which invests it in the White Steed andAlbatross.
What is it that in the Albino man so peculiarly repels and oftenshocks the eye, as that sometimes he is loathed by his own kith andkin! It is that whiteness which invests him, a thing expressed bythe name he bears.
The Albino is as well made as other men--has nosubstantive deformity--and yet this mere aspect of all-pervadingwhiteness makes him more strangely hideous than the ugliest abortion.
Why should this be so?Nor, in quite other aspects, does Nature in her least palpable butnot the less malicious agencies, fail to enlist among her forces thiscrowning attribute of the terrible.
From its snowy aspect, thegauntleted ghost of the Southern Seas has been denominated the WhiteSquall.
Nor, in some historic instances, has the art of human maliceomitted so potent an auxiliary.
How wildly it heightens the effectof that passage in Froissart, when, masked in the snowy symbol oftheir faction, the desperate White Hoods of Ghent murder theirbailiff in the market-place!Nor, in some things, does the common, hereditary experience of allmankind fail to bear witness to the supernaturalism of this hue.
Itcannot well be doubted, that the one visible quality in the aspect ofthe dead which most appals the gazer, is the marble pallor lingeringthere; as if indeed that pallor were as much like the badge ofconsternation in the other world, as of mortal trepidation here.
Andfrom that pallor of the dead, we borrow the expressive hue of theshroud in which we wrap them.
Nor even in our superstitions do wefail to throw the same snowy mantle round our phantoms; all ghostsrising in a milk-white fog--Yea, while these terrors seize us, let usadd, that even the king of terrors, when personified by theevangelist, rides on his pallid horse.
Therefore, in his other moods, symbolize whatever grand or graciousthing he will by whiteness, no man can deny that in its profoundestidealized significance it calls up a peculiar apparition to the soul.
But though without dissent this point be fixed, how is mortal man toaccount for it? To analyse it, would seem impossible.
Can we,then, by the citation of some of those instances wherein this thingof whiteness--though for the time either wholly or in great partstripped of all direct associations calculated to impart to it aughtfearful, but nevertheless, is found to exert over us the samesorcery, however modified;--can we thus hope to light upon somechance clue to conduct us to the hidden cause we seek?Let us try.
But in a matter like this, subtlety appeals to subtlety,and without imagination no man can follow another into these halls.
And though, doubtless, some at least of the imaginative impressionsabout to be presented may have been shared by most men, yet fewperhaps were entirely conscious of them at the time, and thereforemay not be able to recall them now.
Why to the man of untutored ideality, who happens to be but looselyacquainted with the peculiar character of the day, does the baremention of Whitsuntide marshal in the fancy such long, dreary,speechless processions of slow-pacing pilgrims, down-cast and hoodedwith new-fallen snow? Or, to the unread, unsophisticated Protestantof the Middle American States, why does the passing mention of aWhite Friar or a White Nun, evoke such an eyeless statue in the soul?Or what is there apart from the traditions of dungeoned warriors andkings (which will not wholly account for it) that makes the WhiteTower of London tell so much more strongly on the imagination of anuntravelled American, than those other storied structures, itsneighbors--the Byward Tower, or even the Bloody? And those sublimertowers, the White Mountains of New Hampshire, whence, in peculiarmoods, comes that gigantic ghostliness over the soul at the baremention of that name, while the thought of Virginia's Blue Ridge isfull of a soft, dewy, distant dreaminess? Or why, irrespective ofall latitudes and longitudes, does the name of the White Sea exertsuch a spectralness over the fancy, while that of the Yellow Sealulls us with mortal thoughts of long lacquered mild afternoons onthe waves, followed by the gaudiest and yet sleepiest of sunsets?Or, to choose a wholly unsubstantial instance, purely addressed tothe fancy, why, in reading the old fairy tales of Central Europe,does "the tall pale man" of the Hartz forests, whose changelesspallor unrustlingly glides through the green of the groves--why isthis phantom more terrible than all the whooping imps of theBlocksburg?Nor is it, altogether, the remembrance of her cathedral-topplingearthquakes; nor the stampedoes of her frantic seas; nor thetearlessness of arid skies that never rain; nor the sight of herwide field of leaning spires, wrenched cope-stones, and crosses alladroop (like canted yards of anchored fleets); and her suburbanavenues of house-walls lying over upon each other, as a tossed packof cards;--it is not these things alone which make tearless Lima, thestrangest, saddest city thou can'st see.
For Lima has taken thewhite veil; and there is a higher horror in this whiteness of herwoe.
Old as Pizarro, this whiteness keeps her ruins for ever new;admits not the cheerful greenness of complete decay; spreads over herbroken ramparts the rigid pallor of an apoplexy that fixes its owndistortions.
I know that, to the common apprehension, this phenomenon of whitenessis not confessed to be the prime agent in exaggerating the terror ofobjects otherwise terrible; nor to the unimaginative mind is thereaught of terror in those appearances whose awfulness to another mindalmost solely consists in this one phenomenon, especially whenexhibited under any form at all approaching to muteness oruniversality.
What I mean by these two statements may perhaps berespectively elucidated by the following examples.
First: The mariner, when drawing nigh the coasts of foreign lands, ifby night he hear the roar of breakers, starts to vigilance, and feelsjust enough of trepidation to sharpen all his faculties; but underprecisely similar circumstances, let him be called from his hammockto view his ship sailing through a midnight sea of milkywhiteness--as if from encircling headlands shoals of combed whitebears were swimming round him, then he feels a silent, superstitiousdread; the shrouded phantom of the whitened waters is horrible to himas a real ghost; in vain the lead assures him he is still offsoundings; heart and helm they both go down; he never rests till bluewater is under him again.
Yet where is the mariner who will tellthee, "Sir, it was not so much the fear of striking hidden rocks, asthe fear of that hideous whiteness that so stirred me?"Second: To the native Indian of Peru, the continual sight of thesnowhowdahed Andes conveys naught of dread, except, perhaps, in themere fancying of the eternal frosted desolateness reigning at suchvast altitudes, and the natural conceit of what a fearfulness itwould be to lose oneself in such inhuman solitudes.
Much the same isit with the backwoodsman of the West, who with comparativeindifference views an unbounded prairie sheeted with driven snow, noshadow of tree or twig to break the fixed trance of whiteness.
Notso the sailor, beholding the scenery of the Antarctic seas; where attimes, by some infernal trick of legerdemain in the powers of frostand air, he, shivering and half shipwrecked, instead of rainbowsspeaking hope and solace to his misery, views what seems a boundlesschurchyard grinning upon him with its lean ice monuments andsplintered crosses.
But thou sayest, methinks that white-lead chapter about whiteness isbut a white flag hung out from a craven soul; thou surrenderest to ahypo, Ishmael.
Tell me, why this strong young colt, foaled in some peaceful valleyof Vermont, far removed from all beasts of prey--why is it that uponthe sunniest day, if you but shake a fresh buffalo robe behind him,so that he cannot even see it, but only smells its wild animalmuskiness--why will he start, snort, and with bursting eyes paw theground in phrensies of affright? There is no remembrance in him ofany gorings of wild creatures in his green northern home, so that thestrange muskiness he smells cannot recall to him anything associatedwith the experience of former perils; for what knows he, this NewEngland colt, of the black bisons of distant Oregon?No; but here thou beholdest even in a dumb brute, the instinct of theknowledge of the demonism in the world.
Though thousands of milesfrom Oregon, still when he smells that savage musk, the rending,goring bison herds are as present as to the deserted wild foal of theprairies, which this instant they may be trampling into dust.
Thus, then, the muffled rollings of a milky sea; the bleak rustlingsof the festooned frosts of mountains; the desolate shiftings of thewindrowed snows of prairies; all these, to Ishmael, are as theshaking of that buffalo robe to the frightened colt!Though neither knows where lie the nameless things of which themystic sign gives forth such hints; yet with me, as with the colt,somewhere those things must exist.
Though in many of its aspectsthis visible world seems formed in love, the invisible spheres wereformed in fright.
But not yet have we solved the incantation of this whiteness, andlearned why it appeals with such power to the soul; and more strangeand far more portentous--why, as we have seen, it is at once the mostmeaning symbol of spiritual things, nay, the very veil of theChristian's Deity; and yet should be as it is, the intensifying agentin things the most appalling to mankind.
Is it that by its indefiniteness it shadows forth the heartless voidsand immensities of the universe, and thus stabs us from behind withthe thought of annihilation, when beholding the white depths of themilky way? Or is it, that as in essence whiteness is not so much acolour as the visible absence of colour; and at the same time theconcrete of all colours; is it for these reasons that there is such adumb blankness, full of meaning, in a wide landscape of snows--acolourless, all-colour of atheism from which we shrink? And when weconsider that other theory of the natural philosophers, that allother earthly hues--every stately or lovely emblazoning--the sweettinges of sunset skies and woods; yea, and the gilded velvets ofbutterflies, and the butterfly cheeks of young girls; all these arebut subtile deceits, not actually inherent in substances, but onlylaid on from without; so that all deified Nature absolutely paintslike the harlot, whose allurements cover nothing but thecharnel-house within; and when we proceed further, and consider thatthe mystical cosmetic which produces every one of her hues, the greatprinciple of light, for ever remains white or colourless in itself,and if operating without medium upon matter, would touch all objects,even tulips and roses, with its own blank tinge--pondering all this,the palsied universe lies before us a leper; and like wilfultravellers in Lapland, who refuse to wear coloured and colouringglasses upon their eyes, so the wretched infidel gazes himself blindat the monumental white shroud that wraps all the prospect aroundhim.
And of all these things the Albino whale was the symbol.
Wonder ye then at the fiery hunt?Hark!"HIST! Did you hear that noise, Cabaco?It was the middle-watch; a fair moonlight; the seamen were standingin a cordon, extending from one of the fresh-water butts in thewaist, to the scuttle-butt near the taffrail.
In this manner, theypassed the buckets to fill the scuttle-butt.
Standing, for the mostpart, on the hallowed precincts of the quarter-deck, they werecareful not to speak or rustle their feet.
From hand to hand, thebuckets went in the deepest silence, only broken by the occasionalflap of a sail, and the steady hum of the unceasingly advancing keel.
It was in the midst of this repose, that Archy, one of the cordon,whose post was near the after-hatches, whispered to his neighbor, aCholo, the words above.
"Hist! did you hear that noise, Cabaco?""Take the bucket, will ye, Archy? what noise d'ye mean?""There it is again--under the hatches--don't you hear it--a cough--itsounded like a cough.
""Cough be damned! Pass along that return bucket.
""There again--there it is!--it sounds like two or three sleepersturning over, now!""Caramba! have done, shipmate, will ye? It's the three soakedbiscuits ye eat for supper turning over inside of ye--nothing else.
Look to the bucket!""Say what ye will, shipmate; I've sharp ears.
""Aye, you are the chap, ain't ye, that heard the hum of the oldQuakeress's knitting-needles fifty miles at sea from Nantucket;you're the chap.
""Grin away; we'll see what turns up.
Hark ye, Cabaco, there issomebody down in the after-hold that has not yet been seen on deck;and I suspect our old Mogul knows something of it too.
I heard Stubbtell Flask, one morning watch, that there was something of that sortin the wind.
""Tish! the bucket!"The Chart.
Had you followed Captain Ahab down into his cabin after the squallthat took place on the night succeeding that wild ratification of hispurpose with his crew, you would have seen him go to a locker in thetransom, and bringing out a large wrinkled roll of yellowish seacharts, spread them before him on his screwed-down table.
Thenseating himself before it, you would have seen him intently study thevarious lines and shadings which there met his eye; and with slow butsteady pencil trace additional courses over spaces that before wereblank.
At intervals, he would refer to piles of old log-books besidehim, wherein were set down the seasons and places in which, onvarious former voyages of various ships, sperm whales had beencaptured or seen.
While thus employed, the heavy pewter lamp suspended in chains overhis head, continually rocked with the motion of the ship, and forever threw shifting gleams and shadows of lines upon his wrinkledbrow, till it almost seemed that while he himself was marking outlines and courses on the wrinkled charts, some invisible pencil wasalso tracing lines and courses upon the deeply marked chart of hisforehead.
But it was not this night in particular that, in the solitude of hiscabin, Ahab thus pondered over his charts.
Almost every night theywere brought out; almost every night some pencil marks were effaced,and others were substituted.
For with the charts of all four oceansbefore him, Ahab was threading a maze of currents and eddies, with aview to the more certain accomplishment of that monomaniac thought ofhis soul.
Now, to any one not fully acquainted with the ways of the leviathans,it might seem an absurdly hopeless task thus to seek out one solitarycreature in the unhooped oceans of this planet.
But not so did itseem to Ahab, who knew the sets of all tides and currents; andthereby calculating the driftings of the sperm whale's food; and,also, calling to mind the regular, ascertained seasons for huntinghim in particular latitudes; could arrive at reasonable surmises,almost approaching to certainties, concerning the timeliest day to beupon this or that ground in search of his prey.
So assured, indeed, is the fact concerning the periodicalness of thesperm whale's resorting to given waters, that many hunters believethat, could he be closely observed and studied throughout the world;were the logs for one voyage of the entire whale fleet carefullycollated, then the migrations of the sperm whale would be found tocorrespond in invariability to those of the herring-shoals or theflights of swallows.
On this hint, attempts have been made toconstruct elaborate migratory charts of the sperm whale.
**Since the above was written, the statement is happily borne out byan official circular, issued by Lieutenant Maury, of the NationalObservatory, Washington, April 16th, 1851.
By that circular, itappears that precisely such a chart is in course of completion; andportions of it are presented in the circular.
"This chart dividesthe ocean into districts of five degrees of latitude by five degreesof longitude; perpendicularly through each of which districts aretwelve columns for the twelve months; and horizontally through eachof which districts are three lines; one to show the number of daysthat have been spent in each month in every district, and the twoothers to show the number of days in which whales, sperm or right,have been seen.
"Besides, when making a passage from one feeding-ground to another,the sperm whales, guided by some infallible instinct--say, rather,secret intelligence from the Deity--mostly swim in VEINS, as they arecalled; continuing their way along a given ocean-line with suchundeviating exactitude, that no ship ever sailed her course, by anychart, with one tithe of such marvellous precision.
Though, in thesecases, the direction taken by any one whale be straight as asurveyor's parallel, and though the line of advance be strictlyconfined to its own unavoidable, straight wake, yet the arbitraryVEIN in which at these times he is said to swim, generally embracessome few miles in width (more or less, as the vein is presumed toexpand or contract); but never exceeds the visual sweep from thewhale-ship's mast-heads, when circumspectly gliding along this magiczone.
The sum is, that at particular seasons within that breadth andalong that path, migrating whales may with great confidence be lookedfor.
And hence not only at substantiated times, upon well known separatefeeding-grounds, could Ahab hope to encounter his prey; but incrossing the widest expanses of water between those grounds he could,by his art, so place and time himself on his way, as even then not tobe wholly without prospect of a meeting.
There was a circumstance which at first sight seemed to entangle hisdelirious but still methodical scheme.
But not so in the reality,perhaps.
Though the gregarious sperm whales have their regularseasons for particular grounds, yet in general you cannot concludethat the herds which haunted such and such a latitude or longitudethis year, say, will turn out to be identically the same with thosethat were found there the preceding season; though there are peculiarand unquestionable instances where the contrary of this has provedtrue.
In general, the same remark, only within a less wide limit,applies to the solitaries and hermits among the matured, aged spermwhales.
So that though Moby Dick had in a former year been seen, forexample, on what is called the Seychelle ground in the Indian ocean,or Volcano Bay on the Japanese Coast; yet it did not follow, thatwere the Pequod to visit either of those spots at any subsequentcorresponding season, she would infallibly encounter him there.
So,too, with some other feeding grounds, where he had at times revealedhimself.
But all these seemed only his casual stopping-places andocean-inns, so to speak, not his places of prolonged abode.
Andwhere Ahab's chances of accomplishing his object have hitherto beenspoken of, allusion has only been made to whatever way-side,antecedent, extra prospects were his, ere a particular set time orplace were attained, when all possibilities would becomeprobabilities, and, as Ahab fondly thought, every possibility thenext thing to a certainty.
That particular set time and place wereconjoined in the one technical phrase--the Season-on-the-Line.
Forthere and then, for several consecutive years, Moby Dick had beenperiodically descried, lingering in those waters for awhile, as thesun, in its annual round, loiters for a predicted interval in any onesign of the Zodiac.
There it was, too, that most of the deadlyencounters with the white whale had taken place; there the waves werestoried with his deeds; there also was that tragic spot where themonomaniac old man had found the awful motive to his vengeance.
Butin the cautious comprehensiveness and unloitering vigilance withwhich Ahab threw his brooding soul into this unfaltering hunt, hewould not permit himself to rest all his hopes upon the one crowningfact above mentioned, however flattering it might be to those hopes;nor in the sleeplessness of his vow could he so tranquillize hisunquiet heart as to postpone all intervening quest.
Now, the Pequod had sailed from Nantucket at the very beginning ofthe Season-on-the-Line.
No possible endeavor then could enable hercommander to make the great passage southwards, double Cape Horn, andthen running down sixty degrees of latitude arrive in the equatorialPacific in time to cruise there.
Therefore, he must wait for thenext ensuing season.
Yet the premature hour of the Pequod's sailinghad, perhaps, been correctly selected by Ahab, with a view to thisvery complexion of things.
Because, an interval of three hundred andsixty-five days and nights was before him; an interval which, insteadof impatiently enduring ashore, he would spend in a miscellaneoushunt; if by chance the White Whale, spending his vacation in seas farremote from his periodical feeding-grounds, should turn up hiswrinkled brow off the Persian Gulf, or in the Bengal Bay, or ChinaSeas, or in any other waters haunted by his race.
So that Monsoons,Pampas, Nor'-Westers, Harmattans, Trades; any wind but the Levanterand Simoon, might blow Moby Dick into the devious zig-zagworld-circle of the Pequod's circumnavigating wake.
But granting all this; yet, regarded discreetly and coolly, seems itnot but a mad idea, this; that in the broad boundless ocean, onesolitary whale, even if encountered, should be thought capable ofindividual recognition from his hunter, even as a white-bearded Muftiin the thronged thoroughfares of Constantinople? Yes.
For thepeculiar snow-white brow of Moby Dick, and his snow-white hump, couldnot but be unmistakable.
And have I not tallied the whale, Ahabwould mutter to himself, as after poring over his charts till longafter midnight he would throw himself back in reveries--tallied him,and shall he escape? His broad fins are bored, and scalloped outlike a lost sheep's ear! And here, his mad mind would run on in abreathless race; till a weariness and faintness of pondering cameover him; and in the open air of the deck he would seek to recoverhis strength.
Ah, God! what trances of torments does that man endurewho is consumed with one unachieved revengeful desire.
He sleepswith clenched hands; and wakes with his own bloody nails in hispalms.
Often, when forced from his hammock by exhausting and intolerablyvivid dreams of the night, which, resuming his own intense thoughtsthrough the day, carried them on amid a clashing of phrensies, andwhirled them round and round and round in his blazing brain, tillthe very throbbing of his life-spot became insufferable anguish; andwhen, as was sometimes the case, these spiritual throes in him heavedhis being up from its base, and a chasm seemed opening in him, fromwhich forked flames and lightnings shot up, and accursed fiendsbeckoned him to leap down among them; when this hell in himselfyawned beneath him, a wild cry would be heard through the ship; andwith glaring eyes Ahab would burst from his state room, as thoughescaping from a bed that was on fire.
Yet these, perhaps, instead ofbeing the unsuppressable symptoms of some latent weakness, or frightat his own resolve, were but the plainest tokens of its intensity.
For, at such times, crazy Ahab, the scheming, unappeasedly steadfasthunter of the white whale; this Ahab that had gone to his hammock,was not the agent that so caused him to burst from it in horroragain.
The latter was the eternal, living principle or soul in him;and in sleep, being for the time dissociated from the characterizingmind, which at other times employed it for its outer vehicle oragent, it spontaneously sought escape from the scorching contiguityof the frantic thing, of which, for the time, it was no longer anintegral.
But as the mind does not exist unless leagued with thesoul, therefore it must have been that, in Ahab's case, yielding upall his thoughts and fancies to his one supreme purpose; thatpurpose, by its own sheer inveteracy of will, forced itself againstgods and devils into a kind of self-assumed, independent being of itsown.
Nay, could grimly live and burn, while the common vitality towhich it was conjoined, fled horror-stricken from the unbidden andunfathered birth.
Therefore, the tormented spirit that glared out ofbodily eyes, when what seemed Ahab rushed from his room, was for thetime but a vacated thing, a formless somnambulistic being, a ray ofliving light, to be sure, but without an object to colour, andtherefore a blankness in itself.
God help thee, old man, thythoughts have created a creature in thee; and he whose intensethinking thus makes him a Prometheus; a vulture feeds upon that heartfor ever; that vulture the very creature he creates.
The Affidavit.
So far as what there may be of a narrative in this book; and, indeed,as indirectly touching one or two very interesting and curiousparticulars in the habits of sperm whales, the foregoing chapter, inits earlier part, is as important a one as will be found in thisvolume; but the leading matter of it requires to be still further andmore familiarly enlarged upon, in order to be adequately understood,and moreover to take away any incredulity which a profound ignoranceof the entire subject may induce in some minds, as to the naturalverity of the main points of this affair.
I care not to perform this part of my task methodically; but shall becontent to produce the desired impression by separate citations ofitems, practically or reliably known to me as a whaleman; and fromthese citations, I take it--the conclusion aimed at will naturallyfollow of itself.
First: I have personally known three instances where a whale, afterreceiving a harpoon, has effected a complete escape; and, after aninterval (in one instance of three years), has been again struck bythe same hand, and slain; when the two irons, both marked by the sameprivate cypher, have been taken from the body.
In the instance wherethree years intervened between the flinging of the two harpoons; andI think it may have been something more than that; the man who dartedthem happening, in the interval, to go in a trading ship on a voyageto Africa, went ashore there, joined a discovery party, andpenetrated far into the interior, where he travelled for a period ofnearly two years, often endangered by serpents, savages, tigers,poisonous miasmas, with all the other common perils incident towandering in the heart of unknown regions.
Meanwhile, the whale hehad struck must also have been on its travels; no doubt it had thricecircumnavigated the globe, brushing with its flanks all the coasts ofAfrica; but to no purpose.
This man and this whale again cametogether, and the one vanquished the other.
I say I, myself, haveknown three instances similar to this; that is in two of them I sawthe whales struck; and, upon the second attack, saw the two ironswith the respective marks cut in them, afterwards taken from the deadfish.
In the three-year instance, it so fell out that I was in theboat both times, first and last, and the last time distinctlyrecognised a peculiar sort of huge mole under the whale's eye, whichI had observed there three years previous.
I say three years, but Iam pretty sure it was more than that.
Here are three instances,then, which I personally know the truth of; but I have heard of manyother instances from persons whose veracity in the matter there is nogood ground to impeach.
Secondly: It is well known in the Sperm Whale Fishery, howeverignorant the world ashore may be of it, that there have been severalmemorable historical instances where a particular whale in the oceanhas been at distant times and places popularly cognisable.
Why sucha whale became thus marked was not altogether and originally owing tohis bodily peculiarities as distinguished from other whales; forhowever peculiar in that respect any chance whale may be, they soonput an end to his peculiarities by killing him, and boiling him downinto a peculiarly valuable oil.
No: the reason was this: that fromthe fatal experiences of the fishery there hung a terrible prestigeof perilousness about such a whale as there did about RinaldoRinaldini, insomuch that most fishermen were content to recognise himby merely touching their tarpaulins when he would be discoveredlounging by them on the sea, without seeking to cultivate a moreintimate acquaintance.
Like some poor devils ashore that happen toknow an irascible great man, they make distant unobtrusivesalutations to him in the street, lest if they pursued theacquaintance further, they might receive a summary thump for theirpresumption.
But not only did each of these famous whales enjoy great individualcelebrity--Nay, you may call it an ocean-wide renown; not only was hefamous in life and now is immortal in forecastle stories after death,but he was admitted into all the rights, privileges, and distinctionsof a name; had as much a name indeed as Cambyses or Caesar.
Was itnot so, O Timor Tom! thou famed leviathan, scarred like an iceberg,who so long did'st lurk in the Oriental straits of that name, whosespout was oft seen from the palmy beach of Ombay? Was it not so, ONew Zealand Jack! thou terror of all cruisers that crossed theirwakes in the vicinity of the Tattoo Land? Was it not so, O Morquan!King of Japan, whose lofty jet they say at times assumed thesemblance of a snow-white cross against the sky? Was it not so, ODon Miguel! thou Chilian whale, marked like an old tortoise withmystic hieroglyphics upon the back! In plain prose, here are fourwhales as well known to the students of Cetacean History as Marius orSylla to the classic scholar.
But this is not all.
New Zealand Tom and Don Miguel, after atvarious times creating great havoc among the boats of differentvessels, were finally gone in quest of, systematically hunted out,chased and killed by valiant whaling captains, who heaved up theiranchors with that express object as much in view, as in setting outthrough the Narragansett Woods, Captain Butler of old had it in hismind to capture that notorious murderous savage Annawon, the headmostwarrior of the Indian King Philip.
I do not know where I can find a better place than just here, to makemention of one or two other things, which to me seem important, as inprinted form establishing in all respects the reasonableness of thewhole story of the White Whale, more especially the catastrophe.
Forthis is one of those disheartening instances where truth requiresfull as much bolstering as error.
So ignorant are most landsmen ofsome of the plainest and most palpable wonders of the world, thatwithout some hints touching the plain facts, historical andotherwise, of the fishery, they might scout at Moby Dick as amonstrous fable, or still worse and more detestable, a hideous andintolerable allegory.
First: Though most men have some vague flitting ideas of the generalperils of the grand fishery, yet they have nothing like a fixed,vivid conception of those perils, and the frequency with which theyrecur.
One reason perhaps is, that not one in fifty of the actualdisasters and deaths by casualties in the fishery, ever finds apublic record at home, however transient and immediately forgottenthat record.
Do you suppose that that poor fellow there, who thismoment perhaps caught by the whale-line off the coast of New Guinea,is being carried down to the bottom of the sea by the soundingleviathan--do you suppose that that poor fellow's name will appear inthe newspaper obituary you will read to-morrow at your breakfast?No: because the mails are very irregular between here and New Guinea.
In fact, did you ever hear what might be called regular news director indirect from New Guinea? Yet I tell you that upon one particularvoyage which I made to the Pacific, among many others we spoke thirtydifferent ships, every one of which had had a death by a whale, someof them more than one, and three that had each lost a boat's crew.
For God's sake, be economical with your lamps and candles! not agallon you burn, but at least one drop of man's blood was spilled forit.
Secondly: People ashore have indeed some indefinite idea that a whaleis an enormous creature of enormous power; but I have ever found thatwhen narrating to them some specific example of this two-foldenormousness, they have significantly complimented me upon myfacetiousness; when, I declare upon my soul, I had no more idea ofbeing facetious than Moses, when he wrote the history of the plaguesof Egypt.
But fortunately the special point I here seek can be established upontestimony entirely independent of my own.
That point is this: TheSperm Whale is in some cases sufficiently powerful, knowing, andjudiciously malicious, as with direct aforethought to stave in,utterly destroy, and sink a large ship; and what is more, the SpermWhale HAS done it.
First: In the year 1820 the ship Essex, Captain Pollard, ofNantucket, was cruising in the Pacific Ocean.
One day she sawspouts, lowered her boats, and gave chase to a shoal of sperm whales.
Ere long, several of the whales were wounded; when, suddenly, a verylarge whale escaping from the boats, issued from the shoal, and boredirectly down upon the ship.
Dashing his forehead against her hull,he so stove her in, that in less than "ten minutes" she settled downand fell over.
Not a surviving plank of her has been seen since.
After the severest exposure, part of the crew reached the land intheir boats.
Being returned home at last, Captain Pollard once moresailed for the Pacific in command of another ship, but the godsshipwrecked him again upon unknown rocks and breakers; for the secondtime his ship was utterly lost, and forthwith forswearing the sea, hehas never tempted it since.
At this day Captain Pollard is aresident of Nantucket.
I have seen Owen Chace, who was chief mate ofthe Essex at the time of the tragedy; I have read his plain andfaithful narrative; I have conversed with his son; and all thiswithin a few miles of the scene of the catastrophe.
**The following are extracts from Chace's narrative: "Every factseemed to warrant me in concluding that it was anything but chancewhich directed his operations; he made two several attacks upon theship, at a short interval between them, both of which, according totheir direction, were calculated to do us the most injury, by beingmade ahead, and thereby combining the speed of the two objects forthe shock; to effect which, the exact manoeuvres which he made werenecessary.
His aspect was most horrible, and such as indicatedresentment and fury.
He came directly from the shoal which we hadjust before entered, and in which we had struck three of hiscompanions, as if fired with revenge for their sufferings.
" Again:"At all events, the whole circumstances taken together, all happeningbefore my own eyes, and producing, at the time, impressions in mymind of decided, calculating mischief, on the part of the whale (manyof which impressions I cannot now recall), induce me to be satisfiedthat I am correct in my opinion.
"Here are his reflections some time after quitting the ship, during ablack night an open boat, when almost despairing of reaching anyhospitable shore.
"The dark ocean and swelling waters were nothing;the fears of being swallowed up by some dreadful tempest, or dashedupon hidden rocks, with all the other ordinary subjects of fearfulcontemplation, seemed scarcely entitled to a moment's thought; thedismal looking wreck, and THE HORRID ASPECT AND REVENGE OF THE WHALE,wholly engrossed my reflections, until day again made itsappearance.
"In another place--p.
45,--he speaks of "THE MYSTERIOUS AND MORTALATTACK OF THE ANIMAL.
"Secondly: The ship Union, also of Nantucket, was in the year 1807totally lost off the Azores by a similar onset, but the authenticparticulars of this catastrophe I have never chanced to encounter,though from the whale hunters I have now and then heard casualallusions to it.
Thirdly: Some eighteen or twenty years ago Commodore J---, thencommanding an American sloop-of-war of the first class, happened tobe dining with a party of whaling captains, on board a Nantucket shipin the harbor of Oahu, Sandwich Islands.
Conversation turning uponwhales, the Commodore was pleased to be sceptical touching theamazing strength ascribed to them by the professional gentlemenpresent.
He peremptorily denied for example, that any whale could sosmite his stout sloop-of-war as to cause her to leak so much as athimbleful.
Very good; but there is more coming.
Some weeks after,the Commodore set sail in this impregnable craft for Valparaiso.
Buthe was stopped on the way by a portly sperm whale, that begged a fewmoments' confidential business with him.
That business consisted infetching the Commodore's craft such a thwack, that with all his pumpsgoing he made straight for the nearest port to heave down and repair.
I am not superstitious, but I consider the Commodore's interviewwith that whale as providential.
Was not Saul of Tarsus convertedfrom unbelief by a similar fright? I tell you, the sperm whale willstand no nonsense.
I will now refer you to Langsdorff's Voyages for a littlecircumstance in point, peculiarly interesting to the writer hereof.
Langsdorff, you must know by the way, was attached to the RussianAdmiral Krusenstern's famous Discovery Expedition in the beginning ofthe present century.
Captain Langsdorff thus begins his seventeenthchapter:"By the thirteenth of May our ship was ready to sail, and the nextday we were out in the open sea, on our way to Ochotsh.
The weatherwas very clear and fine, but so intolerably cold that we were obligedto keep on our fur clothing.
For some days we had very little wind;it was not till the nineteenth that a brisk gale from the northwestsprang up.
An uncommon large whale, the body of which was largerthan the ship itself, lay almost at the surface of the water, but wasnot perceived by any one on board till the moment when the ship,which was in full sail, was almost upon him, so that it wasimpossible to prevent its striking against him.
We were thus placedin the most imminent danger, as this gigantic creature, setting upits back, raised the ship three feet at least out of the water.
Themasts reeled, and the sails fell altogether, while we who were belowall sprang instantly upon the deck, concluding that we had struckupon some rock; instead of this we saw the monster sailing off withthe utmost gravity and solemnity.
Captain D'Wolf applied immediatelyto the pumps to examine whether or not the vessel had received anydamage from the shock, but we found that very happily it had escapedentirely uninjured.
"Now, the Captain D'Wolf here alluded to as commanding the ship inquestion, is a New Englander, who, after a long life of unusualadventures as a sea-captain, this day resides in the village ofDorchester near Boston.
I have the honour of being a nephew of his.
I have particularly questioned him concerning this passage inLangsdorff.
He substantiates every word.
The ship, however, was byno means a large one: a Russian craft built on the Siberian coast,and purchased by my uncle after bartering away the vessel in which hesailed from home.
In that up and down manly book of old-fashioned adventure, so full,too, of honest wonders--the voyage of Lionel Wafer, one of ancientDampier's old chums--I found a little matter set down so like thatjust quoted from Langsdorff, that I cannot forbear inserting it herefor a corroborative example, if such be needed.
Lionel, it seems, was on his way to "John Ferdinando," as he callsthe modern Juan Fernandes.
"In our way thither," he says, "aboutfour o'clock in the morning, when we were about one hundred and fiftyleagues from the Main of America, our ship felt a terrible shock,which put our men in such consternation that they could hardly tellwhere they were or what to think; but every one began to prepare fordeath.
And, indeed, the shock was so sudden and violent, that wetook it for granted the ship had struck against a rock; but when theamazement was a little over, we cast the lead, and sounded, but foundno ground.
.
The suddenness of the shock made the guns leap intheir carriages, and several of the men were shaken out of theirhammocks.
Captain Davis, who lay with his head on a gun, was thrownout of his cabin!" Lionel then goes on to impute the shock to anearthquake, and seems to substantiate the imputation by stating thata great earthquake, somewhere about that time, did actually do greatmischief along the Spanish land.
But I should not much wonder if, inthe darkness of that early hour of the morning, the shock was afterall caused by an unseen whale vertically bumping the hull frombeneath.
I might proceed with several more examples, one way or another knownto me, of the great power and malice at times of the sperm whale.
Inmore than one instance, he has been known, not only to chase theassailing boats back to their ships, but to pursue the ship itself,and long withstand all the lances hurled at him from its decks.
TheEnglish ship Pusie Hall can tell a story on that head; and, as forhis strength, let me say, that there have been examples where thelines attached to a running sperm whale have, in a calm, beentransferred to the ship, and secured there; the whale towing hergreat hull through the water, as a horse walks off with a cart.
Again, it is very often observed that, if the sperm whale, oncestruck, is allowed time to rally, he then acts, not so often withblind rage, as with wilful, deliberate designs of destruction to hispursuers; nor is it without conveying some eloquent indication of hischaracter, that upon being attacked he will frequently open hismouth, and retain it in that dread expansion for several consecutiveminutes.
But I must be content with only one more and a concludingillustration; a remarkable and most significant one, by which youwill not fail to see, that not only is the most marvellous event inthis book corroborated by plain facts of the present day, but thatthese marvels (like all marvels) are mere repetitions of the ages; sothat for the millionth time we say amen with Solomon--Verily there isnothing new under the sun.
In the sixth Christian century lived Procopius, a Christianmagistrate of Constantinople, in the days when Justinian was Emperorand Belisarius general.
As many know, he wrote the history of hisown times, a work every way of uncommon value.
By the bestauthorities, he has always been considered a most trustworthy andunexaggerating historian, except in some one or two particulars, notat all affecting the matter presently to be mentioned.
Now, in this history of his, Procopius mentions that, during the termof his prefecture at Constantinople, a great sea-monster was capturedin the neighboring Propontis, or Sea of Marmora, after havingdestroyed vessels at intervals in those waters for a period of morethan fifty years.
A fact thus set down in substantial history cannoteasily be gainsaid.
Nor is there any reason it should be.
Of whatprecise species this sea-monster was, is not mentioned.
But as hedestroyed ships, as well as for other reasons, he must have been awhale; and I am strongly inclined to think a sperm whale.
And I willtell you why.
For a long time I fancied that the sperm whale hadbeen always unknown in the Mediterranean and the deep watersconnecting with it.
Even now I am certain that those seas are not,and perhaps never can be, in the present constitution of things, aplace for his habitual gregarious resort.
But further investigationshave recently proved to me, that in modern times there have beenisolated instances of the presence of the sperm whale in theMediterranean.
I am told, on good authority, that on the Barbarycoast, a Commodore Davis of the British navy found the skeleton of asperm whale.
Now, as a vessel of war readily passes through theDardanelles, hence a sperm whale could, by the same route, pass outof the Mediterranean into the Propontis.
In the Propontis, as far as I can learn, none of that peculiarsubstance called BRIT is to be found, the aliment of the right whale.
But I have every reason to believe that the food of the spermwhale--squid or cuttle-fish--lurks at the bottom of that sea, becauselarge creatures, but by no means the largest of that sort, have beenfound at its surface.
If, then, you properly put these statementstogether, and reason upon them a bit, you will clearly perceive that,according to all human reasoning, Procopius's sea-monster, that forhalf a century stove the ships of a Roman Emperor, must in allprobability have been a sperm whale.
Surmises.
Though, consumed with the hot fire of his purpose, Ahab in all histhoughts and actions ever had in view the ultimate capture of MobyDick; though he seemed ready to sacrifice all mortal interests tothat one passion; nevertheless it may have been that he was by natureand long habituation far too wedded to a fiery whaleman's ways,altogether to abandon the collateral prosecution of the voyage.
Orat least if this were otherwise, there were not wanting other motivesmuch more influential with him.
It would be refining too much,perhaps, even considering his monomania, to hint that hisvindictiveness towards the White Whale might have possibly extendeditself in some degree to all sperm whales, and that the more monstershe slew by so much the more he multiplied the chances that eachsubsequently encountered whale would prove to be the hated one hehunted.
But if such an hypothesis be indeed exceptionable, therewere still additional considerations which, though not so strictlyaccording with the wildness of his ruling passion, yet were by nomeans incapable of swaying him.
To accomplish his object Ahab must use tools; and of all tools usedin the shadow of the moon, men are most apt to get out of order.
Heknew, for example, that however magnetic his ascendency in somerespects was over Starbuck, yet that ascendency did not cover thecomplete spiritual man any more than mere corporeal superiorityinvolves intellectual mastership; for to the purely spiritual, theintellectual but stand in a sort of corporeal relation.
Starbuck'sbody and Starbuck's coerced will were Ahab's, so long as Ahab kepthis magnet at Starbuck's brain; still he knew that for all this thechief mate, in his soul, abhorred his captain's quest, and could he,would joyfully disintegrate himself from it, or even frustrate it.
It might be that a long interval would elapse ere the White Whale wasseen.
During that long interval Starbuck would ever be apt to fallinto open relapses of rebellion against his captain's leadership,unless some ordinary, prudential, circumstantial influences werebrought to bear upon him.
Not only that, but the subtle insanity ofAhab respecting Moby Dick was noways more significantly manifestedthan in his superlative sense and shrewdness in foreseeing that, forthe present, the hunt should in some way be stripped of that strangeimaginative impiousness which naturally invested it; that the fullterror of the voyage must be kept withdrawn into the obscurebackground (for few men's courage is proof against protractedmeditation unrelieved by action); that when they stood their longnight watches, his officers and men must have some nearer things tothink of than Moby Dick.
For however eagerly and impetuously thesavage crew had hailed the announcement of his quest; yet all sailorsof all sorts are more or less capricious and unreliable--they live inthe varying outer weather, and they inhale its fickleness--and whenretained for any object remote and blank in the pursuit, howeverpromissory of life and passion in the end, it is above all thingsrequisite that temporary interests and employments should interveneand hold them healthily suspended for the final dash.
Nor was Ahab unmindful of another thing.
In times of strong emotionmankind disdain all base considerations; but such times areevanescent.
The permanent constitutional condition of themanufactured man, thought Ahab, is sordidness.
Granting that theWhite Whale fully incites the hearts of this my savage crew, andplaying round their savageness even breeds a certain generousknight-errantism in them, still, while for the love of it they givechase to Moby Dick, they must also have food for their more common,daily appetites.
For even the high lifted and chivalric Crusaders ofold times were not content to traverse two thousand miles of land tofight for their holy sepulchre, without committing burglaries,picking pockets, and gaining other pious perquisites by the way.
Hadthey been strictly held to their one final and romantic object--thatfinal and romantic object, too many would have turned from indisgust.
I will not strip these men, thought Ahab, of all hopes ofcash--aye, cash.
They may scorn cash now; but let some months go by,and no perspective promise of it to them, and then this samequiescent cash all at once mutinying in them, this same cash wouldsoon cashier Ahab.
Nor was there wanting still another precautionary motive more relatedto Ahab personally.
Having impulsively, it is probable, and perhapssomewhat prematurely revealed the prime but private purpose of thePequod's voyage, Ahab was now entirely conscious that, in so doing,he had indirectly laid himself open to the unanswerable charge ofusurpation; and with perfect impunity, both moral and legal, his crewif so disposed, and to that end competent, could refuse all furtherobedience to him, and even violently wrest from him the command.
From even the barely hinted imputation of usurpation, and thepossible consequences of such a suppressed impression gaining ground,Ahab must of course have been most anxious to protect himself.
Thatprotection could only consist in his own predominating brain andheart and hand, backed by a heedful, closely calculating attention toevery minute atmospheric influence which it was possible for his crewto be subjected to.
For all these reasons then, and others perhaps too analytic to beverbally developed here, Ahab plainly saw that he must still in agood degree continue true to the natural, nominal purpose of thePequod's voyage; observe all customary usages; and not only that, butforce himself to evince all his well known passionate interest in thegeneral pursuit of his profession.
Be all this as it may, his voice was now often heard hailing thethree mast-heads and admonishing them to keep a bright look-out, andnot omit reporting even a porpoise.
This vigilance was not longwithout reward.
The Mat-Maker.
It was a cloudy, sultry afternoon; the seamen were lazily loungingabout the decks, or vacantly gazing over into the lead-colouredwaters.
Queequeg and I were mildly employed weaving what is called asword-mat, for an additional lashing to our boat.
So still andsubdued and yet somehow preluding was all the scene, and such anincantation of reverie lurked in the air, that each silent sailorseemed resolved into his own invisible self.
I was the attendant or page of Queequeg, while busy at the mat.
As Ikept passing and repassing the filling or woof of marline between thelong yarns of the warp, using my own hand for the shuttle, and asQueequeg, standing sideways, ever and anon slid his heavy oaken swordbetween the threads, and idly looking off upon the water, carelesslyand unthinkingly drove home every yarn: I say so strange adreaminess did there then reign all over the ship and all over thesea, only broken by the intermitting dull sound of the sword, that itseemed as if this were the Loom of Time, and I myself were a shuttlemechanically weaving and weaving away at the Fates.
There lay thefixed threads of the warp subject to but one single, ever returning,unchanging vibration, and that vibration merely enough to admit ofthe crosswise interblending of other threads with its own.
This warpseemed necessity; and here, thought I, with my own hand I ply my ownshuttle and weave my own destiny into these unalterable threads.
Meantime, Queequeg's impulsive, indifferent sword, sometimes hittingthe woof slantingly, or crookedly, or strongly, or weakly, as thecase might be; and by this difference in the concluding blowproducing a corresponding contrast in the final aspect of thecompleted fabric; this savage's sword, thought I, which thus finallyshapes and fashions both warp and woof; this easy, indifferent swordmust be chance--aye, chance, free will, and necessity--nowiseincompatible--all interweavingly working together.
The straight warpof necessity, not to be swerved from its ultimate course--its everyalternating vibration, indeed, only tending to that; free will stillfree to ply her shuttle between given threads; and chance, thoughrestrained in its play within the right lines of necessity, andsideways in its motions directed by free will, though thus prescribedto by both, chance by turns rules either, and has the last featuringblow at events.
Thus we were weaving and weaving away when I started at a sound sostrange, long drawn, and musically wild and unearthly, that the ballof free will dropped from my hand, and I stood gazing up at theclouds whence that voice dropped like a wing.
High aloft in thecross-trees was that mad Gay-Header, Tashtego.
His body was reachingeagerly forward, his hand stretched out like a wand, and at briefsudden intervals he continued his cries.
To be sure the same soundwas that very moment perhaps being heard all over the seas, fromhundreds of whalemen's look-outs perched as high in the air; but fromfew of those lungs could that accustomed old cry have derived such amarvellous cadence as from Tashtego the Indian's.
As he stood hovering over you half suspended in air, so wildly andeagerly peering towards the horizon, you would have thought him someprophet or seer beholding the shadows of Fate, and by those wildcries announcing their coming.
"There she blows! there! there! there! she blows! she blows!""Where-away?""On the lee-beam, about two miles off! a school of them!"Instantly all was commotion.
The Sperm Whale blows as a clock ticks, with the same undeviating andreliable uniformity.
And thereby whalemen distinguish this fish fromother tribes of his genus.
"There go flukes!" was now the cry from Tashtego; and the whalesdisappeared.
"Quick, steward!" cried Ahab.
"Time! time!"Dough-Boy hurried below, glanced at the watch, and reported the exactminute to Ahab.
The ship was now kept away from the wind, and she went gently rollingbefore it.
Tashtego reporting that the whales had gone down headingto leeward, we confidently looked to see them again directly inadvance of our bows.
For that singular craft at times evinced by theSperm Whale when, sounding with his head in one direction, henevertheless, while concealed beneath the surface, mills round, andswiftly swims off in the opposite quarter--this deceitfulness of hiscould not now be in action; for there was no reason to suppose thatthe fish seen by Tashtego had been in any way alarmed, or indeed knewat all of our vicinity.
One of the men selected forshipkeepers--that is, those not appointed to the boats, by this timerelieved the Indian at the main-mast head.
The sailors at the foreand mizzen had come down; the line tubs were fixed in their places;the cranes were thrust out; the mainyard was backed, and the threeboats swung over the sea like three samphire baskets over highcliffs.
Outside of the bulwarks their eager crews with one handclung to the rail, while one foot was expectantly poised on thegunwale.
So look the long line of man-of-war's men about to throwthemselves on board an enemy's ship.
But at this critical instant a sudden exclamation was heard that tookevery eye from the whale.
With a start all glared at dark Ahab, whowas surrounded by five dusky phantoms that seemed fresh formed out ofair.
The First Lowering.
The phantoms, for so they then seemed, were flitting on the otherside of the deck, and, with a noiseless celerity, were casting loosethe tackles and bands of the boat which swung there.
This boat hadalways been deemed one of the spare boats, though technically calledthe captain's, on account of its hanging from the starboard quarter.
The figure that now stood by its bows was tall and swart, with onewhite tooth evilly protruding from its steel-like lips.
A rumpledChinese jacket of black cotton funereally invested him, with wideblack trowsers of the same dark stuff.
But strangely crowning thisebonness was a glistening white plaited turban, the living hairbraided and coiled round and round upon his head.
Less swart inaspect, the companions of this figure were of that vivid,tiger-yellow complexion peculiar to some of the aboriginal natives ofthe Manillas;--a race notorious for a certain diabolism of subtilty,and by some honest white mariners supposed to be the paid spies andsecret confidential agents on the water of the devil, their lord,whose counting-room they suppose to be elsewhere.
While yet the wondering ship's company were gazing upon thesestrangers, Ahab cried out to the white-turbaned old man at theirhead, "All ready there, Fedallah?""Ready," was the half-hissed reply.
"Lower away then; d'ye hear?" shouting across the deck.
"Lower awaythere, I say.
"Such was the thunder of his voice, that spite of their amazement themen sprang over the rail; the sheaves whirled round in the blocks;with a wallow, the three boats dropped into the sea; while, with adexterous, off-handed daring, unknown in any other vocation, thesailors, goat-like, leaped down the rolling ship's side into thetossed boats below.
Hardly had they pulled out from under the ship's lee, when a fourthkeel, coming from the windward side, pulled round under the stern,and showed the five strangers rowing Ahab, who, standing erect in thestern, loudly hailed Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask, to spread themselveswidely, so as to cover a large expanse of water.
But with all theireyes again riveted upon the swart Fedallah and his crew, the inmatesof the other boats obeyed not the command.
"Captain Ahab?--" said Starbuck.
"Spread yourselves," cried Ahab; "give way, all four boats.
Thou,Flask, pull out more to leeward!""Aye, aye, sir," cheerily cried little King-Post, sweeping round hisgreat steering oar.
"Lay back!" addressing his crew.
"There!--there!--there again! There she blows right ahead,boys!--lay back!""Never heed yonder yellow boys, Archy.
""Oh, I don't mind'em, sir," said Archy; "I knew it all before now.
Didn't I hear 'em in the hold? And didn't I tell Cabaco here of it?What say ye, Cabaco? They are stowaways, Mr.
Flask.
""Pull, pull, my fine hearts-alive; pull, my children; pull, my littleones," drawlingly and soothingly sighed Stubb to his crew, some ofwhom still showed signs of uneasiness.
"Why don't you break yourbackbones, my boys? What is it you stare at? Those chaps in yonderboat? Tut! They are only five more hands come to help us--nevermind from where--the more the merrier.
Pull, then, do pull; nevermind the brimstone--devils are good fellows enough.
So, so; thereyou are now; that's the stroke for a thousand pounds; that's thestroke to sweep the stakes! Hurrah for the gold cup of sperm oil, myheroes! Three cheers, men--all hearts alive! Easy, easy; don't bein a hurry--don't be in a hurry.
Why don't you snap your oars, yourascals? Bite something, you dogs! So, so, so, then:--softly,softly! That's it--that's it! long and strong.
Give way there, giveway! The devil fetch ye, ye ragamuffin rapscallions; ye are allasleep.
Stop snoring, ye sleepers, and pull.
Pull, will ye? pull,can't ye? pull, won't ye? Why in the name of gudgeons andginger-cakes don't ye pull?--pull and break something! pull, andstart your eyes out! Here!" whipping out the sharp knife from hisgirdle; "every mother's son of ye draw his knife, and pull with theblade between his teeth.
That's it--that's it.
Now ye do something;that looks like it, my steel-bits.
Start her--start her, mysilver-spoons! Start her, marling-spikes!"Stubb's exordium to his crew is given here at large, because he hadrather a peculiar way of talking to them in general, and especiallyin inculcating the religion of rowing.
But you must not suppose fromthis specimen of his sermonizings that he ever flew into downrightpassions with his congregation.
Not at all; and therein consistedhis chief peculiarity.
He would say the most terrific things to hiscrew, in a tone so strangely compounded of fun and fury, and the furyseemed so calculated merely as a spice to the fun, that no oarsmancould hear such queer invocations without pulling for dear life, andyet pulling for the mere joke of the thing.
Besides he all the timelooked so easy and indolent himself, so loungingly managed hissteering-oar, and so broadly gaped--open-mouthed at times--that themere sight of such a yawning commander, by sheer force of contrast,acted like a charm upon the crew.
Then again, Stubb was one of thoseodd sort of humorists, whose jollity is sometimes so curiouslyambiguous, as to put all inferiors on their guard in the matter ofobeying them.
In obedience to a sign from Ahab, Starbuck was now pulling obliquelyacross Stubb's bow; and when for a minute or so the two boats werepretty near to each other, Stubb hailed the mate.
"Mr.
Starbuck! larboard boat there, ahoy! a word with ye, sir, if yeplease!""Halloa!" returned Starbuck, turning round not a single inch as hespoke; still earnestly but whisperingly urging his crew; his face setlike a flint from Stubb's.
"What think ye of those yellow boys, sir!"Smuggled on board, somehow, before the ship sailed.
(Strong, strong,boys!)" in a whisper to his crew, then speaking out loud again: "Asad business, Mr.
Stubb! (seethe her, seethe her, my lads!) but nevermind, Mr.
Stubb, all for the best.
Let all your crew pull strong,come what will.
(Spring, my men, spring!) There's hogsheads of spermahead, Mr.
Stubb, and that's what ye came for.
(Pull, my boys!)Sperm, sperm's the play! This at least is duty; duty and profit handin hand.
""Aye, aye, I thought as much," soliloquized Stubb, when the boatsdiverged, "as soon as I clapt eye on 'em, I thought so.
Aye, andthat's what he went into the after hold for, so often, as Dough-Boylong suspected.
They were hidden down there.
The White Whale's atthe bottom of it.
Well, well, so be it! Can't be helped! Allright! Give way, men! It ain't the White Whale to-day! Give way!"Now the advent of these outlandish strangers at such a criticalinstant as the lowering of the boats from the deck, this had notunreasonably awakened a sort of superstitious amazement in some ofthe ship's company; but Archy's fancied discovery having some timeprevious got abroad among them, though indeed not credited then, thishad in some small measure prepared them for the event.
It took offthe extreme edge of their wonder; and so what with all this andStubb's confident way of accounting for their appearance, they werefor the time freed from superstitious surmisings; though the affairstill left abundant room for all manner of wild conjectures as todark Ahab's precise agency in the matter from the beginning.
For me,I silently recalled the mysterious shadows I had seen creeping onboard the Pequod during the dim Nantucket dawn, as well as theenigmatical hintings of the unaccountable Elijah.
Meantime, Ahab, out of hearing of his officers, having sided thefurthest to windward, was still ranging ahead of the other boats; acircumstance bespeaking how potent a crew was pulling him.
Thosetiger yellow creatures of his seemed all steel and whalebone; likefive trip-hammers they rose and fell with regular strokes ofstrength, which periodically started the boat along the water like ahorizontal burst boiler out of a Mississippi steamer.
As forFedallah, who was seen pulling the harpooneer oar, he had thrownaside his black jacket, and displayed his naked chest with the wholepart of his body above the gunwale, clearly cut against thealternating depressions of the watery horizon; while at the other endof the boat Ahab, with one arm, like a fencer's, thrown half backwardinto the air, as if to counterbalance any tendency to trip; Ahab wasseen steadily managing his steering oar as in a thousand boatlowerings ere the White Whale had torn him.
All at once theoutstretched arm gave a peculiar motion and then remained fixed,while the boat's five oars were seen simultaneously peaked.
Boat andcrew sat motionless on the sea.
Instantly the three spread boats inthe rear paused on their way.
The whales had irregularly settledbodily down into the blue, thus giving no distantly discernible tokenof the movement, though from his closer vicinity Ahab had observedit.
"Every man look out along his oars!" cried Starbuck.
"Thou,Queequeg, stand up!"Nimbly springing up on the triangular raised box in the bow, thesavage stood erect there, and with intensely eager eyes gazed offtowards the spot where the chase had last been descried.
Likewiseupon the extreme stern of the boat where it was also triangularlyplatformed level with the gunwale, Starbuck himself was seen coollyand adroitly balancing himself to the jerking tossings of his chip ofa craft, and silently eyeing the vast blue eye of the sea.
Not very far distant Flask's boat was also lying breathlessly still;its commander recklessly standing upon the top of the loggerhead, astout sort of post rooted in the keel, and rising some two feet abovethe level of the stern platform.
It is used for catching turns withthe whale line.
Its top is not more spacious than the palm of aman's hand, and standing upon such a base as that, Flask seemedperched at the mast-head of some ship which had sunk to all but hertrucks.
But little King-Post was small and short, and at the sametime little King-Post was full of a large and tall ambition, so thatthis loggerhead stand-point of his did by no means satisfy King-Post.
"I can't see three seas off; tip us up an oar there, and let me on tothat.
"Upon this, Daggoo, with either hand upon the gunwale to steady hisway, swiftly slid aft, and then erecting himself volunteered hislofty shoulders for a pedestal.
"Good a mast-head as any, sir.
Will you mount?""That I will, and thank ye very much, my fine fellow; only I wish youfifty feet taller.
"Whereupon planting his feet firmly against two opposite planks of theboat, the gigantic negro, stooping a little, presented his flat palmto Flask's foot, and then putting Flask's hand on his hearse-plumedhead and bidding him spring as he himself should toss, with onedexterous fling landed the little man high and dry on his shoulders.
And here was Flask now standing, Daggoo with one lifted armfurnishing him with a breastband to lean against and steady himselfby.
At any time it is a strange sight to the tyro to see with whatwondrous habitude of unconscious skill the whaleman will maintain anerect posture in his boat, even when pitched about by the mostriotously perverse and cross-running seas.
Still more strange to seehim giddily perched upon the loggerhead itself, under suchcircumstances.
But the sight of little Flask mounted upon giganticDaggoo was yet more curious; for sustaining himself with a cool,indifferent, easy, unthought of, barbaric majesty, the noble negro toevery roll of the sea harmoniously rolled his fine form.
On hisbroad back, flaxen-haired Flask seemed a snow-flake.
The bearerlooked nobler than the rider.
Though truly vivacious, tumultuous,ostentatious little Flask would now and then stamp with impatience;but not one added heave did he thereby give to the negro's lordlychest.
So have I seen Passion and Vanity stamping the livingmagnanimous earth, but the earth did not alter her tides and herseasons for that.
Meanwhile Stubb, the third mate, betrayed no such far-gazingsolicitudes.
The whales might have made one of their regularsoundings, not a temporary dive from mere fright; and if that werethe case, Stubb, as his wont in such cases, it seems, was resolved tosolace the languishing interval with his pipe.
He withdrew it fromhis hatband, where he always wore it aslant like a feather.
Heloaded it, and rammed home the loading with his thumb-end; but hardlyhad he ignited his match across the rough sandpaper of his hand,when Tashtego, his harpooneer, whose eyes had been setting towindward like two fixed stars, suddenly dropped like light from hiserect attitude to his seat, crying out in a quick phrensy of hurry,"Down, down all, and give way!--there they are!"To a landsman, no whale, nor any sign of a herring, would have beenvisible at that moment; nothing but a troubled bit of greenish whitewater, and thin scattered puffs of vapour hovering over it, andsuffusingly blowing off to leeward, like the confused scud from whiterolling billows.
The air around suddenly vibrated and tingled, as itwere, like the air over intensely heated plates of iron.
Beneaththis atmospheric waving and curling, and partially beneath a thinlayer of water, also, the whales were swimming.
Seen in advance ofall the other indications, the puffs of vapour they spouted, seemedtheir forerunning couriers and detached flying outriders.
All four boats were now in keen pursuit of that one spot of troubledwater and air.
But it bade fair to outstrip them; it flew on and on,as a mass of interblending bubbles borne down a rapid stream from thehills.
"Pull, pull, my good boys," said Starbuck, in the lowest possible butintensest concentrated whisper to his men; while the sharp fixedglance from his eyes darted straight ahead of the bow, almost seemedas two visible needles in two unerring binnacle compasses.
He didnot say much to his crew, though, nor did his crew say anything tohim.
Only the silence of the boat was at intervals startlinglypierced by one of his peculiar whispers, now harsh with command, nowsoft with entreaty.
How different the loud little King-Post.
"Sing out and saysomething, my hearties.
Roar and pull, my thunderbolts! Beach me,beach me on their black backs, boys; only do that for me, and I'llsign over to you my Martha's Vineyard plantation, boys; includingwife and children, boys.
Lay me on--lay me on! O Lord, Lord! but Ishall go stark, staring mad! See! see that white water!" And soshouting, he pulled his hat from his head, and stamped up and down onit; then picking it up, flirted it far off upon the sea; and finallyfell to rearing and plunging in the boat's stern like a crazed coltfrom the prairie.
"Look at that chap now," philosophically drawled Stubb, who, with hisunlighted short pipe, mechanically retained between his teeth, at ashort distance, followed after--"He's got fits, that Flask has.
Fits? yes, give him fits--that's the very word--pitch fits into 'em.
Merrily, merrily, hearts-alive.
Pudding for supper, youknow;--merry's the word.
Pull, babes--pull, sucklings--pull, all.
But what the devil are you hurrying about? Softly, softly, andsteadily, my men.
Only pull, and keep pulling; nothing more.
Crackall your backbones, and bite your knives in two--that's all.
Take iteasy--why don't ye take it easy, I say, and burst all your livers andlungs!"But what it was that inscrutable Ahab said to that tiger-yellow crewof his--these were words best omitted here; for you live under theblessed light of the evangelical land.
Only the infidel sharks inthe audacious seas may give ear to such words, when, with tornadobrow, and eyes of red murder, and foam-glued lips, Ahab leaped afterhis prey.
Meanwhile, all the boats tore on.
The repeated specific allusions ofFlask to "that whale," as he called the fictitious monster which hedeclared to be incessantly tantalizing his boat's bow with itstail--these allusions of his were at times so vivid and life-like,that they would cause some one or two of his men to snatch a fearfullook over the shoulder.
But this was against all rule; for theoarsmen must put out their eyes, and ram a skewer through theirnecks; usage pronouncing that they must have no organs but ears, andno limbs but arms, in these critical moments.
It was a sight full of quick wonder and awe! The vast swells of theomnipotent sea; the surging, hollow roar they made, as they rolledalong the eight gunwales, like gigantic bowls in a boundlessbowling-green; the brief suspended agony of the boat, as it would tipfor an instant on the knife-like edge of the sharper waves, thatalmost seemed threatening to cut it in two; the sudden profound dipinto the watery glens and hollows; the keen spurrings and goadings togain the top of the opposite hill; the headlong, sled-like slide downits other side;--all these, with the cries of the headsmen andharpooneers, and the shuddering gasps of the oarsmen, with thewondrous sight of the ivory Pequod bearing down upon her boats withoutstretched sails, like a wild hen after her screaming brood;--allthis was thrilling.
Not the raw recruit, marching from the bosom of his wife into thefever heat of his first battle; not the dead man's ghost encounteringthe first unknown phantom in the other world;--neither of these canfeel stranger and stronger emotions than that man does, who for thefirst time finds himself pulling into the charmed, churned circle ofthe hunted sperm whale.
The dancing white water made by the chase was now becoming more andmore visible, owing to the increasing darkness of the duncloud-shadows flung upon the sea.
The jets of vapour no longerblended, but tilted everywhere to right and left; the whales seemedseparating their wakes.
The boats were pulled more apart; Starbuckgiving chase to three whales running dead to leeward.
Our sail wasnow set, and, with the still rising wind, we rushed along; the boatgoing with such madness through the water, that the lee oars couldscarcely be worked rapidly enough to escape being torn from therow-locks.
Soon we were running through a suffusing wide veil of mist; neithership nor boat to be seen.
"Give way, men," whispered Starbuck, drawing still further aft thesheet of his sail; "there is time to kill a fish yet before thesquall comes.
There's white water again!--close to! Spring!"Soon after, two cries in quick succession on each side of us denotedthat the other boats had got fast; but hardly were they overheard,when with a lightning-like hurtling whisper Starbuck said: "Standup!" and Queequeg, harpoon in hand, sprang to his feet.
Though not one of the oarsmen was then facing the life and deathperil so close to them ahead, yet with their eyes on the intensecountenance of the mate in the stern of the boat, they knew that theimminent instant had come; they heard, too, an enormous wallowingsound as of fifty elephants stirring in their litter.
Meanwhile theboat was still booming through the mist, the waves curling andhissing around us like the erected crests of enraged serpents.
"That's his hump.
THERE, THERE, give it to him!" whispered Starbuck.
A short rushing sound leaped out of the boat; it was the darted ironof Queequeg.
Then all in one welded commotion came an invisible pushfrom astern, while forward the boat seemed striking on a ledge; thesail collapsed and exploded; a gush of scalding vapour shot up nearby; something rolled and tumbled like an earthquake beneath us.
Thewhole crew were half suffocated as they were tossed helter-skelterinto the white curdling cream of the squall.
Squall, whale, andharpoon had all blended together; and the whale, merely grazed by theiron, escaped.
Though completely swamped, the boat was nearly unharmed.
Swimminground it we picked up the floating oars, and lashing them across thegunwale, tumbled back to our places.
There we sat up to our knees inthe sea, the water covering every rib and plank, so that to ourdownward gazing eyes the suspended craft seemed a coral boat grown upto us from the bottom of the ocean.
The wind increased to a howl; the waves dashed their bucklerstogether; the whole squall roared, forked, and crackled around uslike a white fire upon the prairie, in which, unconsumed, we wereburning; immortal in these jaws of death! In vain we hailed theother boats; as well roar to the live coals down the chimney of aflaming furnace as hail those boats in that storm.
Meanwhile thedriving scud, rack, and mist, grew darker with the shadows of night;no sign of the ship could be seen.
The rising sea forbade allattempts to bale out the boat.
The oars were useless as propellers,performing now the office of life-preservers.
So, cutting thelashing of the waterproof match keg, after many failures Starbuckcontrived to ignite the lamp in the lantern; then stretching it on awaif pole, handed it to Queequeg as the standard-bearer of thisforlorn hope.
There, then, he sat, holding up that imbecile candlein the heart of that almighty forlornness.
There, then, he sat, thesign and symbol of a man without faith, hopelessly holding up hope inthe midst of despair.
Wet, drenched through, and shivering cold, despairing of ship orboat, we lifted up our eyes as the dawn came on.
The mist stillspread over the sea, the empty lantern lay crushed in the bottom ofthe boat.
Suddenly Queequeg started to his feet, hollowing his handto his ear.
We all heard a faint creaking, as of ropes and yardshitherto muffled by the storm.
The sound came nearer and nearer; thethick mists were dimly parted by a huge, vague form.
Affrighted, weall sprang into the sea as the ship at last loomed into view, bearingright down upon us within a distance of not much more than itslength.
Floating on the waves we saw the abandoned boat, as for one instantit tossed and gaped beneath the ship's bows like a chip at the baseof a cataract; and then the vast hull rolled over it, and it was seenno more till it came up weltering astern.
Again we swam for it, weredashed against it by the seas, and were at last taken up and safelylanded on board.
Ere the squall came close to, the other boats hadcut loose from their fish and returned to the ship in good time.
Theship had given us up, but was still cruising, if haply it might lightupon some token of our perishing,--an oar or a lance pole.
The Hyena.
There are certain queer times and occasions in this strange mixedaffair we call life when a man takes this whole universe for a vastpractical joke, though the wit thereof he but dimly discerns, andmore than suspects that the joke is at nobody's expense but his own.
However, nothing dispirits, and nothing seems worth while disputing.
He bolts down all events, all creeds, and beliefs, and persuasions,all hard things visible and invisible, never mind how knobby; as anostrich of potent digestion gobbles down bullets and gun flints.
Andas for small difficulties and worryings, prospects of suddendisaster, peril of life and limb; all these, and death itself, seemto him only sly, good-natured hits, and jolly punches in the sidebestowed by the unseen and unaccountable old joker.
That odd sort ofwayward mood I am speaking of, comes over a man only in some time ofextreme tribulation; it comes in the very midst of his earnestness,so that what just before might have seemed to him a thing mostmomentous, now seems but a part of the general joke.
There isnothing like the perils of whaling to breed this free and easy sortof genial, desperado philosophy; and with it I now regarded thiswhole voyage of the Pequod, and the great White Whale its object.
"Queequeg," said I, when they had dragged me, the last man, to thedeck, and I was still shaking myself in my jacket to fling off thewater; "Queequeg, my fine friend, does this sort of thing oftenhappen?" Without much emotion, though soaked through just like me,he gave me to understand that such things did often happen.
"Mr.
Stubb," said I, turning to that worthy, who, buttoned up in hisoil-jacket, was now calmly smoking his pipe in the rain; "Mr.
Stubb,I think I have heard you say that of all whalemen you ever met, ourchief mate, Mr.
Starbuck, is by far the most careful and prudent.
Isuppose then, that going plump on a flying whale with your sail setin a foggy squall is the height of a whaleman's discretion?""Certain.
I've lowered for whales from a leaking ship in a gale offCape Horn.
""Mr.
Flask," said I, turning to little King-Post, who was standingclose by; "you are experienced in these things, and I am not.
Willyou tell me whether it is an unalterable law in this fishery, Mr.
Flask, for an oarsman to break his own back pulling himselfback-foremost into death's jaws?""Can't you twist that smaller?" said Flask.
"Yes, that's the law.
Ishould like to see a boat's crew backing water up to a whale faceforemost.
Ha, ha! the whale would give them squint for squint, mindthat!"Here then, from three impartial witnesses, I had a deliberatestatement of the entire case.
Considering, therefore, that squallsand capsizings in the water and consequent bivouacks on the deep,were matters of common occurrence in this kind of life; consideringthat at the superlatively critical instant of going on to the whale Imust resign my life into the hands of him who steered theboat--oftentimes a fellow who at that very moment is in hisimpetuousness upon the point of scuttling the craft with his ownfrantic stampings; considering that the particular disaster to ourown particular boat was chiefly to be imputed to Starbuck's drivingon to his whale almost in the teeth of a squall, and considering thatStarbuck, notwithstanding, was famous for his great heedfulness inthe fishery; considering that I belonged to this uncommonly prudentStarbuck's boat; and finally considering in what a devil's chase Iwas implicated, touching the White Whale: taking all things together,I say, I thought I might as well go below and make a rough draft ofmy will.
"Queequeg," said I, "come along, you shall be my lawyer,executor, and legatee.
"It may seem strange that of all men sailors should be tinkering attheir last wills and testaments, but there are no people in the worldmore fond of that diversion.
This was the fourth time in my nauticallife that I had done the same thing.
After the ceremony wasconcluded upon the present occasion, I felt all the easier; a stonewas rolled away from my heart.
Besides, all the days I should nowlive would be as good as the days that Lazarus lived after hisresurrection; a supplementary clean gain of so many months or weeksas the case might be.
I survived myself; my death and burial werelocked up in my chest.
I looked round me tranquilly and contentedly,like a quiet ghost with a clean conscience sitting inside the bars ofa snug family vault.
Now then, thought I, unconsciously rolling up the sleeves of myfrock, here goes for a cool, collected dive at death and destruction,and the devil fetch the hindmost.
Ahab's Boat and Crew.
Fedallah.
"Who would have thought it, Flask!" cried Stubb; "if I had but oneleg you would not catch me in a boat, unless maybe to stop theplug-hole with my timber toe.
Oh! he's a wonderful old man!""I don't think it so strange, after all, on that account," saidFlask.
"If his leg were off at the hip, now, it would be a differentthing.
That would disable him; but he has one knee, and good part ofthe other left, you know.
""I don't know that, my little man; I never yet saw him kneel.
"Among whale-wise people it has often been argued whether, consideringthe paramount importance of his life to the success of the voyage, itis right for a whaling captain to jeopardize that life in the activeperils of the chase.
So Tamerlane's soldiers often argued with tearsin their eyes, whether that invaluable life of his ought to becarried into the thickest of the fight.
But with Ahab the question assumed a modified aspect.
Consideringthat with two legs man is but a hobbling wight in all times ofdanger; considering that the pursuit of whales is always under greatand extraordinary difficulties; that every individual moment, indeed,then comprises a peril; under these circumstances is it wise for anymaimed man to enter a whale-boat in the hunt? As a general thing,the joint-owners of the Pequod must have plainly thought not.
Ahab well knew that although his friends at home would think littleof his entering a boat in certain comparatively harmless vicissitudesof the chase, for the sake of being near the scene of action andgiving his orders in person, yet for Captain Ahab to have a boatactually apportioned to him as a regular headsman in the hunt--aboveall for Captain Ahab to be supplied with five extra men, as that sameboat's crew, he well knew that such generous conceits never entered theheads of the owners of the Pequod.
Therefore he had not solicited aboat's crew from them, nor had he in any way hinted his desires onthat head.
Nevertheless he had taken private measures of his owntouching all that matter.
Until Cabaco's published discovery, thesailors had little foreseen it, though to be sure when, after being alittle while out of port, all hands had concluded the customarybusiness of fitting the whaleboats for service; when some time afterthis Ahab was now and then found bestirring himself in the matter ofmaking thole-pins with his own hands for what was thought to be oneof the spare boats, and even solicitously cutting the small woodenskewers, which when the line is running out are pinned over thegroove in the bow: when all this was observed in him, andparticularly his solicitude in having an extra coat of sheathing inthe bottom of the boat, as if to make it better withstand the pointedpressure of his ivory limb; and also the anxiety he evinced inexactly shaping the thigh board, or clumsy cleat, as it is sometimescalled, the horizontal piece in the boat's bow for bracing the kneeagainst in darting or stabbing at the whale; when it was observed howoften he stood up in that boat with his solitary knee fixed in thesemi-circular depression in the cleat, and with the carpenter'schisel gouged out a little here and straightened it a little there;all these things, I say, had awakened much interest and curiosity atthe time.
But almost everybody supposed that this particularpreparative heedfulness in Ahab must only be with a view to theultimate chase of Moby Dick; for he had already revealed hisintention to hunt that mortal monster in person.
But such asupposition did by no means involve the remotest suspicion as to anyboat's crew being assigned to that boat.
Now, with the subordinate phantoms, what wonder remained soon wanedaway; for in a whaler wonders soon wane.
Besides, now and then suchunaccountable odds and ends of strange nations come up from theunknown nooks and ash-holes of the earth to man these floatingoutlaws of whalers; and the ships themselves often pick up such queercastaway creatures found tossing about the open sea on planks, bitsof wreck, oars, whaleboats, canoes, blown-off Japanese junks, andwhat not; that Beelzebub himself might climb up the side and stepdown into the cabin to chat with the captain, and it would not createany unsubduable excitement in the forecastle.
But be all this as it may, certain it is that while the subordinatephantoms soon found their place among the crew, though still as itwere somehow distinct from them, yet that hair-turbaned Fedallahremained a muffled mystery to the last.
Whence he came in a mannerlyworld like this, by what sort of unaccountable tie he soon evincedhimself to be linked with Ahab's peculiar fortunes; nay, so far as tohave some sort of a half-hinted influence; Heaven knows, but it mighthave been even authority over him; all this none knew.
But onecannot sustain an indifferent air concerning Fedallah.
He was such acreature as civilized, domestic people in the temperate zone only seein their dreams, and that but dimly; but the like of whom now andthen glide among the unchanging Asiatic communities, especially theOriental isles to the east of the continent--those insulated,immemorial, unalterable countries, which even in these modern daysstill preserve much of the ghostly aboriginalness of earth's primalgenerations, when the memory of the first man was a distinctrecollection, and all men his descendants, unknowing whence he came,eyed each other as real phantoms, and asked of the sun and the moonwhy they were created and to what end; when though, according toGenesis, the angels indeed consorted with the daughters of men, thedevils also, add the uncanonical Rabbins, indulged in mundane amours.
The Spirit-Spout.
Days, weeks passed, and under easy sail, the ivory Pequod had slowlyswept across four several cruising-grounds; that off the Azores; offthe Cape de Verdes; on the Plate (so called), being off the mouth ofthe Rio de la Plata; and the Carrol Ground, an unstaked, waterylocality, southerly from St.
Helena.
It was while gliding through these latter waters that one serene andmoonlight night, when all the waves rolled by like scrolls of silver;and, by their soft, suffusing seethings, made what seemed a silverysilence, not a solitude; on such a silent night a silvery jet wasseen far in advance of the white bubbles at the bow.
Lit up by themoon, it looked celestial; seemed some plumed and glittering goduprising from the sea.
Fedallah first descried this jet.
For ofthese moonlight nights, it was his wont to mount to the main-masthead, and stand a look-out there, with the same precision as if ithad been day.
And yet, though herds of whales were seen by night,not one whaleman in a hundred would venture a lowering for them.
Youmay think with what emotions, then, the seamen beheld this oldOriental perched aloft at such unusual hours; his turban and themoon, companions in one sky.
But when, after spending his uniforminterval there for several successive nights without uttering asingle sound; when, after all this silence, his unearthly voice washeard announcing that silvery, moon-lit jet, every reclining marinerstarted to his feet as if some winged spirit had lighted in therigging, and hailed the mortal crew.
"There she blows!" Had thetrump of judgment blown, they could not have quivered more; yet stillthey felt no terror; rather pleasure.
For though it was a mostunwonted hour, yet so impressive was the cry, and so deliriouslyexciting, that almost every soul on board instinctively desired alowering.
Walking the deck with quick, side-lunging strides, Ahab commanded thet'gallant sails and royals to be set, and every stunsail spread.
Thebest man in the ship must take the helm.
Then, with every mast-headmanned, the piled-up craft rolled down before the wind.
The strange,upheaving, lifting tendency of the taffrail breeze filling thehollows of so many sails, made the buoyant, hovering deck to feellike air beneath the feet; while still she rushed along, as if twoantagonistic influences were struggling in her--one to mount directto heaven, the other to drive yawingly to some horizontal goal.
Andhad you watched Ahab's face that night, you would have thought thatin him also two different things were warring.
While his one liveleg made lively echoes along the deck, every stroke of his dead limbsounded like a coffin-tap.
On life and death this old man walked.
But though the ship so swiftly sped, and though from every eye, likearrows, the eager glances shot, yet the silvery jet was no more seenthat night.
Every sailor swore he saw it once, but not a secondtime.
This midnight-spout had almost grown a forgotten thing, when, somedays after, lo! at the same silent hour, it was again announced:again it was descried by all; but upon making sail to overtake it,once more it disappeared as if it had never been.
And so it servedus night after night, till no one heeded it but to wonder at it.
Mysteriously jetted into the clear moonlight, or starlight, as thecase might be; disappearing again for one whole day, or two days, orthree; and somehow seeming at every distinct repetition to beadvancing still further and further in our van, this solitary jetseemed for ever alluring us on.
Nor with the immemorial superstition of their race, and in accordancewith the preternaturalness, as it seemed, which in many thingsinvested the Pequod, were there wanting some of the seamen who sworethat whenever and wherever descried; at however remote times, or inhowever far apart latitudes and longitudes, that unnearable spout wascast by one self-same whale; and that whale, Moby Dick.
For a time,there reigned, too, a sense of peculiar dread at this flittingapparition, as if it were treacherously beckoning us on and on, inorder that the monster might turn round upon us, and rend us at lastin the remotest and most savage seas.
These temporary apprehensions, so vague but so awful, derived awondrous potency from the contrasting serenity of the weather, inwhich, beneath all its blue blandness, some thought there lurked adevilish charm, as for days and days we voyaged along, through seasso wearily, lonesomely mild, that all space, in repugnance to ourvengeful errand, seemed vacating itself of life before our urn-likeprow.
But, at last, when turning to the eastward, the Cape winds beganhowling around us, and we rose and fell upon the long, troubled seasthat are there; when the ivory-tusked Pequod sharply bowed to theblast, and gored the dark waves in her madness, till, like showers ofsilver chips, the foam-flakes flew over her bulwarks; then all thisdesolate vacuity of life went away, but gave place to sights moredismal than before.
Close to our bows, strange forms in the water darted hither andthither before us; while thick in our rear flew the inscrutablesea-ravens.
And every morning, perched on our stays, rows of thesebirds were seen; and spite of our hootings, for a long timeobstinately clung to the hemp, as though they deemed our ship somedrifting, uninhabited craft; a thing appointed to desolation, andtherefore fit roosting-place for their homeless selves.
And heavedand heaved, still unrestingly heaved the black sea, as if its vasttides were a conscience; and the great mundane soul were in anguishand remorse for the long sin and suffering it had bred.
Cape of Good Hope, do they call ye? Rather Cape Tormentoto, ascalled of yore; for long allured by the perfidious silences thatbefore had attended us, we found ourselves launched into thistormented sea, where guilty beings transformed into those fowls andthese fish, seemed condemned to swim on everlastingly without anyhaven in store, or beat that black air without any horizon.
Butcalm, snow-white, and unvarying; still directing its fountain offeathers to the sky; still beckoning us on from before, the solitaryjet would at times be descried.
During all this blackness of the elements, Ahab, though assuming forthe time the almost continual command of the drenched and dangerousdeck, manifested the gloomiest reserve; and more seldom than everaddressed his mates.
In tempestuous times like these, aftereverything above and aloft has been secured, nothing more can be donebut passively to await the issue of the gale.
Then Captain and crewbecome practical fatalists.
So, with his ivory leg inserted into itsaccustomed hole, and with one hand firmly grasping a shroud, Ahab forhours and hours would stand gazing dead to windward, while anoccasional squall of sleet or snow would all but congeal his veryeyelashes together.
Meantime, the crew driven from the forward partof the ship by the perilous seas that burstingly broke over its bows,stood in a line along the bulwarks in the waist; and the better toguard against the leaping waves, each man had slipped himself into asort of bowline secured to the rail, in which he swung as in aloosened belt.
Few or no words were spoken; and the silent ship, asif manned by painted sailors in wax, day after day tore on throughall the swift madness and gladness of the demoniac waves.
By nightthe same muteness of humanity before the shrieks of the oceanprevailed; still in silence the men swung in the bowlines; stillwordless Ahab stood up to the blast.
Even when wearied nature seemeddemanding repose he would not seek that repose in his hammock.
Never could Starbuck forget the old man's aspect, when one nightgoing down into the cabin to mark how the barometer stood, he saw himwith closed eyes sitting straight in his floor-screwed chair; therain and half-melted sleet of the storm from which he had some timebefore emerged, still slowly dripping from the unremoved hat andcoat.
On the table beside him lay unrolled one of those charts oftides and currents which have previously been spoken of.
His lanternswung from his tightly clenched hand.
Though the body was erect, thehead was thrown back so that the closed eyes were pointed towards theneedle of the tell-tale that swung from a beam in the ceiling.
**The cabin-compass is called the tell-tale, because without going tothe compass at the helm, the Captain, while below, can inform himselfof the course of the ship.
Terrible old man! thought Starbuck with a shudder, sleeping in thisgale, still thou steadfastly eyest thy purpose.
The Albatross.
South-eastward from the Cape, off the distant Crozetts, a goodcruising ground for Right Whalemen, a sail loomed ahead, the Goney(Albatross) by name.
As she slowly drew nigh, from my lofty perch atthe fore-mast-head, I had a good view of that sight so remarkable toa tyro in the far ocean fisheries--a whaler at sea, and long absentfrom home.
As if the waves had been fullers, this craft was bleached like theskeleton of a stranded walrus.
All down her sides, this spectralappearance was traced with long channels of reddened rust, while allher spars and her rigging were like the thick branches of treesfurred over with hoar-frost.
Only her lower sails were set.
A wildsight it was to see her long-bearded look-outs at those threemast-heads.
They seemed clad in the skins of beasts, so torn andbepatched the raiment that had survived nearly four years ofcruising.
Standing in iron hoops nailed to the mast, they swayed andswung over a fathomless sea; and though, when the ship slowly glidedclose under our stern, we six men in the air came so nigh to eachother that we might almost have leaped from the mast-heads of oneship to those of the other; yet, those forlorn-looking fishermen,mildly eyeing us as they passed, said not one word to our ownlook-outs, while the quarter-deck hail was being heard from below.
"Ship ahoy! Have ye seen the White Whale?"But as the strange captain, leaning over the pallid bulwarks, was inthe act of putting his trumpet to his mouth, it somehow fell from hishand into the sea; and the wind now rising amain, he in vain stroveto make himself heard without it.
Meantime his ship was stillincreasing the distance between.
While in various silent waysthe seamen of the Pequod were evincing their observance of thisominous incident at the first mere mention of the White Whale's nameto another ship, Ahab for a moment paused; it almost seemed as thoughhe would have lowered a boat to board the stranger, had not thethreatening wind forbade.
But taking advantage of his windwardposition, he again seized his trumpet, and knowing by her aspect thatthe stranger vessel was a Nantucketer and shortly bound home, heloudly hailed--"Ahoy there! This is the Pequod, bound round theworld! Tell them to address all future letters to the Pacific ocean!and this time three years, if I am not at home, tell them to addressthem to--"At that moment the two wakes were fairly crossed, and instantly,then, in accordance with their singular ways, shoals of smallharmless fish, that for some days before had been placidly swimmingby our side, darted away with what seemed shuddering fins, and rangedthemselves fore and aft with the stranger's flanks.
Though in thecourse of his continual voyagings Ahab must often before have noticeda similar sight, yet, to any monomaniac man, the veriest triflescapriciously carry meanings.
"Swim away from me, do ye?" murmured Ahab, gazing over into thewater.
There seemed but little in the words, but the tone conveyedmore of deep helpless sadness than the insane old man had ever beforeevinced.
But turning to the steersman, who thus far had been holdingthe ship in the wind to diminish her headway, he cried out in his oldlion voice,--"Up helm! Keep her off round the world!"Round the world! There is much in that sound to inspire proudfeelings; but whereto does all that circumnavigation conduct? Onlythrough numberless perils to the very point whence we started, wherethose that we left behind secure, were all the time before us.
Were this world an endless plain, and by sailing eastward we couldfor ever reach new distances, and discover sights more sweet andstrange than any Cyclades or Islands of King Solomon, then there werepromise in the voyage.
But in pursuit of those far mysteries wedream of, or in tormented chase of that demon phantom that, some timeor other, swims before all human hearts; while chasing such over thisround globe, they either lead us on in barren mazes or midway leaveus whelmed.
The Gam.
The ostensible reason why Ahab did not go on board of the whaler wehad spoken was this: the wind and sea betokened storms.
But even hadthis not been the case, he would not after all, perhaps, have boardedher--judging by his subsequent conduct on similar occasions--if so ithad been that, by the process of hailing, he had obtained a negativeanswer to the question he put.
For, as it eventually turned out, hecared not to consort, even for five minutes, with any strangercaptain, except he could contribute some of that information he soabsorbingly sought.
But all this might remain inadequatelyestimated, were not something said here of the peculiar usages ofwhaling-vessels when meeting each other in foreign seas, andespecially on a common cruising-ground.
If two strangers crossing the Pine Barrens in New York State, or theequally desolate Salisbury Plain in England; if casually encounteringeach other in such inhospitable wilds, these twain, for the life ofthem, cannot well avoid a mutual salutation; and stopping for amoment to interchange the news; and, perhaps, sitting down for awhile and resting in concert: then, how much more natural that uponthe illimitable Pine Barrens and Salisbury Plains of the sea, twowhaling vessels descrying each other at the ends of the earth--offlone Fanning's Island, or the far away King's Mills; how much morenatural, I say, that under such circumstances these ships should notonly interchange hails, but come into still closer, more friendly andsociable contact.
And especially would this seem to be a matter ofcourse, in the case of vessels owned in one seaport, and whosecaptains, officers, and not a few of the men are personally known toeach other; and consequently, have all sorts of dear domestic thingsto talk about.
For the long absent ship, the outward-bounder, perhaps, has letterson board; at any rate, she will be sure to let her have some papersof a date a year or two later than the last one on her blurred andthumb-worn files.
And in return for that courtesy, the outward-boundship would receive the latest whaling intelligence from thecruising-ground to which she may be destined, a thing of the utmostimportance to her.
And in degree, all this will hold true concerningwhaling vessels crossing each other's track on the cruising-grounditself, even though they are equally long absent from home.
For oneof them may have received a transfer of letters from some third, andnow far remote vessel; and some of those letters may be for thepeople of the ship she now meets.
Besides, they would exchange thewhaling news, and have an agreeable chat.
For not only would theymeet with all the sympathies of sailors, but likewise with all thepeculiar congenialities arising from a common pursuit and mutuallyshared privations and perils.
Nor would difference of country make any very essential difference;that is, so long as both parties speak one language, as is the casewith Americans and English.
Though, to be sure, from the smallnumber of English whalers, such meetings do not very often occur, andwhen they do occur there is too apt to be a sort of shyness betweenthem; for your Englishman is rather reserved, and your Yankee, hedoes not fancy that sort of thing in anybody but himself.
Besides,the English whalers sometimes affect a kind of metropolitansuperiority over the American whalers; regarding the long, leanNantucketer, with his nondescript provincialisms, as a sort ofsea-peasant.
But where this superiority in the English whalemendoes really consist, it would be hard to say, seeing that the Yankeesin one day, collectively, kill more whales than all the English,collectively, in ten years.
But this is a harmless little foible inthe English whale-hunters, which the Nantucketer does not take muchto heart; probably, because he knows that he has a few foibleshimself.
So, then, we see that of all ships separately sailing the sea, thewhalers have most reason to be sociable--and they are so.
Whereas,some merchant ships crossing each other's wake in the mid-Atlantic,will oftentimes pass on without so much as a single word ofrecognition, mutually cutting each other on the high seas, like abrace of dandies in Broadway; and all the time indulging, perhaps, infinical criticism upon each other's rig.
As for Men-of-War, whenthey chance to meet at sea, they first go through such a string ofsilly bowings and scrapings, such a ducking of ensigns, that theredoes not seem to be much right-down hearty good-will and brotherlylove about it at all.
As touching Slave-ships meeting, why, they arein such a prodigious hurry, they run away from each other as soon aspossible.
And as for Pirates, when they chance to cross each other'scross-bones, the first hail is--"How many skulls?"--the same way thatwhalers hail--"How many barrels?" And that question once answered,pirates straightway steer apart, for they are infernal villains onboth sides, and don't like to see overmuch of each other's villanouslikenesses.
But look at the godly, honest, unostentatious, hospitable, sociable,free-and-easy whaler! What does the whaler do when she meets anotherwhaler in any sort of decent weather? She has a "GAM," a thing soutterly unknown to all other ships that they never heard of the nameeven; and if by chance they should hear of it, they only grin at it,and repeat gamesome stuff about "spouters" and "blubber-boilers," andsuch like pretty exclamations.
Why it is that all Merchant-seamen,and also all Pirates and Man-of-War's men, and Slave-ship sailors,cherish such a scornful feeling towards Whale-ships; this is aquestion it would be hard to answer.
Because, in the case ofpirates, say, I should like to know whether that profession of theirshas any peculiar glory about it.
It sometimes ends in uncommonelevation, indeed; but only at the gallows.
And besides, when a manis elevated in that odd fashion, he has no proper foundation for hissuperior altitude.
Hence, I conclude, that in boasting himself to behigh lifted above a whaleman, in that assertion the pirate has nosolid basis to stand on.
But what is a GAM? You might wear out your index-finger running upand down the columns of dictionaries, and never find the word.
Dr.
Johnson never attained to that erudition; Noah Webster's ark does nothold it.
Nevertheless, this same expressive word has now for manyyears been in constant use among some fifteen thousand true bornYankees.
Certainly, it needs a definition, and should beincorporated into the Lexicon.
With that view, let me learnedlydefine it.
GAM.
NOUN--A SOCIAL MEETING OF TWO (OR MORE) WHALESHIPS, GENERALLYON A CRUISING-GROUND; WHEN, AFTER EXCHANGING HAILS, THEY EXCHANGEVISITS BY BOATS' CREWS; THE TWO CAPTAINS REMAINING, FOR THE TIME, ONBOARD OF ONE SHIP, AND THE TWO CHIEF MATES ON THE OTHER.
There is another little item about Gamming which must not beforgotten here.
All professions have their own little peculiaritiesof detail; so has the whale fishery.
In a pirate, man-of-war, orslave ship, when the captain is rowed anywhere in his boat, he alwayssits in the stern sheets on a comfortable, sometimes cushioned seatthere, and often steers himself with a pretty little milliner'stiller decorated with gay cords and ribbons.
But the whale-boat hasno seat astern, no sofa of that sort whatever, and no tiller at all.
High times indeed, if whaling captains were wheeled about the wateron castors like gouty old aldermen in patent chairs.
And as for atiller, the whale-boat never admits of any such effeminacy; andtherefore as in gamming a complete boat's crew must leave the ship,and hence as the boat steerer or harpooneer is of the number, thatsubordinate is the steersman upon the occasion, and the captain,having no place to sit in, is pulled off to his visit all standinglike a pine tree.
And often you will notice that being conscious ofthe eyes of the whole visible world resting on him from the sides ofthe two ships, this standing captain is all alive to the importanceof sustaining his dignity by maintaining his legs.
Nor is this anyvery easy matter; for in his rear is the immense projecting steeringoar hitting him now and then in the small of his back, the after-oarreciprocating by rapping his knees in front.
He is thus completelywedged before and behind, and can only expand himself sideways bysettling down on his stretched legs; but a sudden, violent pitch ofthe boat will often go far to topple him, because length offoundation is nothing without corresponding breadth.
Merely make aspread angle of two poles, and you cannot stand them up.
Then,again, it would never do in plain sight of the world's riveted eyes,it would never do, I say, for this straddling captain to be seensteadying himself the slightest particle by catching hold of anythingwith his hands; indeed, as token of his entire, buoyant self-command,he generally carries his hands in his trowsers' pockets; but perhapsbeing generally very large, heavy hands, he carries them there forballast.
Nevertheless there have occurred instances, wellauthenticated ones too, where the captain has been known for anuncommonly critical moment or two, in a sudden squall say--to seizehold of the nearest oarsman's hair, and hold on there like grimdeath.
The Town-Ho's Story.
(AS TOLD AT THE GOLDEN INN)The Cape of Good Hope, and all the watery region round about there,is much like some noted four corners of a great highway, where youmeet more travellers than in any other part.
It was not very long after speaking the Goney that anotherhomeward-bound whaleman, the Town-Ho,* was encountered.
She wasmanned almost wholly by Polynesians.
In the short gam that ensuedshe gave us strong news of Moby Dick.
To some the general interestin the White Whale was now wildly heightened by a circumstance of theTown-Ho's story, which seemed obscurely to involve with the whale acertain wondrous, inverted visitation of one of those so calledjudgments of God which at times are said to overtake some men.
Thislatter circumstance, with its own particular accompaniments, formingwhat may be called the secret part of the tragedy about to benarrated, never reached the ears of Captain Ahab or his mates.
Forthat secret part of the story was unknown to the captain of theTown-Ho himself.
It was the private property of three confederatewhite seamen of that ship, one of whom, it seems, communicated it toTashtego with Romish injunctions of secrecy, but the following nightTashtego rambled in his sleep, and revealed so much of it in thatway, that when he was wakened he could not well withhold the rest.
Nevertheless, so potent an influence did this thing have on thoseseamen in the Pequod who came to the full knowledge of it, and bysuch a strange delicacy, to call it so, were they governed in thismatter, that they kept the secret among themselves so that it nevertranspired abaft the Pequod's main-mast.
Interweaving in its properplace this darker thread with the story as publicly narrated on theship, the whole of this strange affair I now proceed to put onlasting record.
*The ancient whale-cry upon first sighting a whale from themast-head, still used by whalemen in hunting the famous Gallipagosterrapin.
For my humor's sake, I shall preserve the style in which I oncenarrated it at Lima, to a lounging circle of my Spanish friends, onesaint's eve, smoking upon the thick-gilt tiled piazza of the GoldenInn.
Of those fine cavaliers, the young Dons, Pedro and Sebastian,were on the closer terms with me; and hence the interluding questionsthey occasionally put, and which are duly answered at the time.
"Some two years prior to my first learning the events which I amabout rehearsing to you, gentlemen, the Town-Ho, Sperm Whaler ofNantucket, was cruising in your Pacific here, not very many days'sail eastward from the eaves of this good Golden Inn.
She wassomewhere to the northward of the Line.
One morning upon handlingthe pumps, according to daily usage, it was observed that she mademore water in her hold than common.
They supposed a sword-fish hadstabbed her, gentlemen.
But the captain, having some unusual reasonfor believing that rare good luck awaited him in those latitudes; andtherefore being very averse to quit them, and the leak not being thenconsidered at all dangerous, though, indeed, they could not find itafter searching the hold as low down as was possible in rather heavyweather, the ship still continued her cruisings, the mariners workingat the pumps at wide and easy intervals; but no good luck came; moredays went by, and not only was the leak yet undiscovered, but itsensibly increased.
So much so, that now taking some alarm, thecaptain, making all sail, stood away for the nearest harbor among theislands, there to have his hull hove out and repaired.
"Though no small passage was before her, yet, if the commonest chancefavoured, he did not at all fear that his ship would founder by theway, because his pumps were of the best, and being periodicallyrelieved at them, those six-and-thirty men of his could easily keepthe ship free; never mind if the leak should double on her.
Intruth, well nigh the whole of this passage being attended by veryprosperous breezes, the Town-Ho had all but certainly arrived inperfect safety at her port without the occurrence of the leastfatality, had it not been for the brutal overbearing of Radney, themate, a Vineyarder, and the bitterly provoked vengeance of Steelkilt,a Lakeman and desperado from Buffalo.
"'Lakeman!--Buffalo! Pray, what is a Lakeman, and where is Buffalo?'said Don Sebastian, rising in his swinging mat of grass.
"On the eastern shore of our Lake Erie, Don; but--I crave yourcourtesy--may be, you shall soon hear further of all that.
Now,gentlemen, in square-sail brigs and three-masted ships, well-nigh aslarge and stout as any that ever sailed out of your old Callao to farManilla; this Lakeman, in the land-locked heart of our America, hadyet been nurtured by all those agrarian freebooting impressionspopularly connected with the open ocean.
For in their interflowingaggregate, those grand fresh-water seas of ours,--Erie, and Ontario,and Huron, and Superior, and Michigan,--possess an ocean-likeexpansiveness, with many of the ocean's noblest traits; with many ofits rimmed varieties of races and of climes.
They contain roundarchipelagoes of romantic isles, even as the Polynesian waters do; inlarge part, are shored by two great contrasting nations, as theAtlantic is; they furnish long maritime approaches to our numerousterritorial colonies from the East, dotted all round their banks;here and there are frowned upon by batteries, and by the goat-likecraggy guns of lofty Mackinaw; they have heard the fleet thunderingsof naval victories; at intervals, they yield their beaches to wildbarbarians, whose red painted faces flash from out their peltrywigwams; for leagues and leagues are flanked by ancient and unenteredforests, where the gaunt pines stand like serried lines of kings inGothic genealogies; those same woods harboring wild Afric beasts ofprey, and silken creatures whose exported furs give robes to TartarEmperors; they mirror the paved capitals of Buffalo and Cleveland, aswell as Winnebago villages; they float alike the full-rigged merchantship, the armed cruiser of the State, the steamer, and the beechcanoe; they are swept by Borean and dismasting blasts as direful asany that lash the salted wave; they know what shipwrecks are, for outof sight of land, however inland, they have drowned full many amidnight ship with all its shrieking crew.
Thus, gentlemen, thoughan inlander, Steelkilt was wild-ocean born, and wild-ocean nurtured;as much of an audacious mariner as any.
And for Radney, though inhis infancy he may have laid him down on the lone Nantucket beach, tonurse at his maternal sea; though in after life he had long followedour austere Atlantic and your contemplative Pacific; yet was he quiteas vengeful and full of social quarrel as the backwoods seaman, freshfrom the latitudes of buck-horn handled bowie-knives.
Yet was thisNantucketer a man with some good-hearted traits; and this Lakeman, amariner, who though a sort of devil indeed, might yet by inflexiblefirmness, only tempered by that common decency of human recognitionwhich is the meanest slave's right; thus treated, this Steelkilt hadlong been retained harmless and docile.
At all events, he had provedso thus far; but Radney was doomed and made mad, and Steelkilt--but,gentlemen, you shall hear.
"It was not more than a day or two at the furthest after pointing herprow for her island haven, that the Town-Ho's leak seemed againincreasing, but only so as to require an hour or more at the pumpsevery day.
You must know that in a settled and civilized ocean likeour Atlantic, for example, some skippers think little of pumpingtheir whole way across it; though of a still, sleepy night, shouldthe officer of the deck happen to forget his duty in that respect,the probability would be that he and his shipmates would never againremember it, on account of all hands gently subsiding to the bottom.
Nor in the solitary and savage seas far from you to the westward,gentlemen, is it altogether unusual for ships to keep clanging attheir pump-handles in full chorus even for a voyage of considerablelength; that is, if it lie along a tolerably accessible coast, or ifany other reasonable retreat is afforded them.
It is only when aleaky vessel is in some very out of the way part of those waters,some really landless latitude, that her captain begins to feel alittle anxious.
"Much this way had it been with the Town-Ho; so when her leak wasfound gaining once more, there was in truth some small concernmanifested by several of her company; especially by Radney the mate.
He commanded the upper sails to be well hoisted, sheeted home anew,and every way expanded to the breeze.
Now this Radney, I suppose,was as little of a coward, and as little inclined to any sort ofnervous apprehensiveness touching his own person as any fearless,unthinking creature on land or on sea that you can convenientlyimagine, gentlemen.
Therefore when he betrayed this solicitude aboutthe safety of the ship, some of the seamen declared that it was onlyon account of his being a part owner in her.
So when they wereworking that evening at the pumps, there was on this head no smallgamesomeness slily going on among them, as they stood with their feetcontinually overflowed by the rippling clear water; clear as anymountain spring, gentlemen--that bubbling from the pumps ran acrossthe deck, and poured itself out in steady spouts at the leescupper-holes.
"Now, as you well know, it is not seldom the case in thisconventional world of ours--watery or otherwise; that when a personplaced in command over his fellow-men finds one of them to be verysignificantly his superior in general pride of manhood, straightwayagainst that man he conceives an unconquerable dislike andbitterness; and if he have a chance he will pull down and pulverizethat subaltern's tower, and make a little heap of dust of it.
Bethis conceit of mine as it may, gentlemen, at all events Steelkiltwas a tall and noble animal with a head like a Roman, and a flowinggolden beard like the tasseled housings of your last viceroy'ssnorting charger; and a brain, and a heart, and a soul in him,gentlemen, which had made Steelkilt Charlemagne, had he been born sonto Charlemagne's father.
But Radney, the mate, was ugly as a mule;yet as hardy, as stubborn, as malicious.
He did not love Steelkilt,and Steelkilt knew it.
"Espying the mate drawing near as he was toiling at the pump with therest, the Lakeman affected not to notice him, but unawed, went onwith his gay banterings.
"'Aye, aye, my merry lads, it's a lively leak this; hold a cannikin,one of ye, and let's have a taste.
By the Lord, it's worth bottling!I tell ye what, men, old Rad's investment must go for it! he hadbest cut away his part of the hull and tow it home.
The fact is,boys, that sword-fish only began the job; he's come back again with agang of ship-carpenters, saw-fish, and file-fish, and what not; andthe whole posse of 'em are now hard at work cutting and slashing atthe bottom; making improvements, I suppose.
If old Rad were herenow, I'd tell him to jump overboard and scatter 'em.
They're playingthe devil with his estate, I can tell him.
But he's a simple oldsoul,--Rad, and a beauty too.
Boys, they say the rest of hisproperty is invested in looking-glasses.
I wonder if he'd give apoor devil like me the model of his nose.
'"'Damn your eyes! what's that pump stopping for?' roared Radney,pretending not to have heard the sailors' talk.
'Thunder away atit!''Aye, aye, sir,' said Steelkilt, merry as a cricket.
'Lively, boys,lively, now!' And with that the pump clanged like fiftyfire-engines; the men tossed their hats off to it, and ere long thatpeculiar gasping of the lungs was heard which denotes the fullesttension of life's utmost energies.
"Quitting the pump at last, with the rest of his band, the Lakemanwent forward all panting, and sat himself down on the windlass; hisface fiery red, his eyes bloodshot, and wiping the profuse sweat fromhis brow.
Now what cozening fiend it was, gentlemen, that possessedRadney to meddle with such a man in that corporeally exasperatedstate, I know not; but so it happened.
Intolerably striding alongthe deck, the mate commanded him to get a broom and sweep down theplanks, and also a shovel, and remove some offensive mattersconsequent upon allowing a pig to run at large.
"Now, gentlemen, sweeping a ship's deck at sea is a piece ofhousehold work which in all times but raging gales is regularlyattended to every evening; it has been known to be done in the caseof ships actually foundering at the time.
Such, gentlemen, is theinflexibility of sea-usages and the instinctive love of neatness inseamen; some of whom would not willingly drown without first washingtheir faces.
But in all vessels this broom business is theprescriptive province of the boys, if boys there be aboard.
Besides,it was the stronger men in the Town-Ho that had been divided intogangs, taking turns at the pumps; and being the most athletic seamanof them all, Steelkilt had been regularly assigned captain of one ofthe gangs; consequently he should have been freed from any trivialbusiness not connected with truly nautical duties, such being thecase with his comrades.
I mention all these particulars so that youmay understand exactly how this affair stood between the two men.
"But there was more than this: the order about the shovel was almostas plainly meant to sting and insult Steelkilt, as though Radney hadspat in his face.
Any man who has gone sailor in a whale-ship willunderstand this; and all this and doubtless much more, the Lakemanfully comprehended when the mate uttered his command.
But as he satstill for a moment, and as he steadfastly looked into the mate'smalignant eye and perceived the stacks of powder-casks heaped up inhim and the slow-match silently burning along towards them; as heinstinctively saw all this, that strange forbearance andunwillingness to stir up the deeper passionateness in any alreadyireful being--a repugnance most felt, when felt at all, by reallyvaliant men even when aggrieved--this nameless phantom feeling,gentlemen, stole over Steelkilt.
"Therefore, in his ordinary tone, only a little broken by the bodilyexhaustion he was temporarily in, he answered him saying thatsweeping the deck was not his business, and he would not do it.
Andthen, without at all alluding to the shovel, he pointed to threelads as the customary sweepers; who, not being billeted at thepumps, had done little or nothing all day.
To this, Radney repliedwith an oath, in a most domineering and outrageous mannerunconditionally reiterating his command; meanwhile advancing upon thestill seated Lakeman, with an uplifted cooper's club hammer which hehad snatched from a cask near by.
"Heated and irritated as he was by his spasmodic toil at the pumps,for all his first nameless feeling of forbearance the sweatingSteelkilt could but ill brook this bearing in the mate; but somehowstill smothering the conflagration within him, without speaking heremained doggedly rooted to his seat, till at last the incensedRadney shook the hammer within a few inches of his face, furiouslycommanding him to do his bidding.
"Steelkilt rose, and slowly retreating round the windlass, steadilyfollowed by the mate with his menacing hammer, deliberately repeatedhis intention not to obey.
Seeing, however, that his forbearance hadnot the slightest effect, by an awful and unspeakable intimation withhis twisted hand he warned off the foolish and infatuated man; but itwas to no purpose.
And in this way the two went once slowly roundthe windlass; when, resolved at last no longer to retreat, bethinkinghim that he had now forborne as much as comported with his humor, theLakeman paused on the hatches and thus spoke to the officer:"'Mr.
Radney, I will not obey you.
Take that hammer away, or look toyourself.
' But the predestinated mate coming still closer to him,where the Lakeman stood fixed, now shook the heavy hammer within aninch of his teeth; meanwhile repeating a string of insufferablemaledictions.
Retreating not the thousandth part of an inch;stabbing him in the eye with the unflinching poniard of his glance,Steelkilt, clenching his right hand behind him and creepingly drawingit back, told his persecutor that if the hammer but grazed his cheekhe (Steelkilt) would murder him.
But, gentlemen, the fool had beenbranded for the slaughter by the gods.
Immediately the hammertouched the cheek; the next instant the lower jaw of the mate wasstove in his head; he fell on the hatch spouting blood like a whale.
"Ere the cry could go aft Steelkilt was shaking one of the backstaysleading far aloft to where two of his comrades were standing theirmastheads.
They were both Canallers.
"'Canallers!' cried Don Pedro.
'We have seen many whale-ships in ourharbours, but never heard of your Canallers.
Pardon: who and what arethey?'"'Canallers, Don, are the boatmen belonging to our grand Erie Canal.
You must have heard of it.
'"'Nay, Senor; hereabouts in this dull, warm, most lazy, andhereditary land, we know but little of your vigorous North.
'"'Aye? Well then, Don, refill my cup.
Your chicha's very fine; andere proceeding further I will tell ye what our Canallers are; forsuch information may throw side-light upon my story.
'"For three hundred and sixty miles, gentlemen, through the entirebreadth of the state of New York; through numerous populous citiesand most thriving villages; through long, dismal, uninhabited swamps,and affluent, cultivated fields, unrivalled for fertility; bybilliard-room and bar-room; through the holy-of-holies of greatforests; on Roman arches over Indian rivers; through sun and shade;by happy hearts or broken; through all the wide contrasting sceneryof those noble Mohawk counties; and especially, by rows of snow-whitechapels, whose spires stand almost like milestones, flows onecontinual stream of Venetianly corrupt and often lawless life.
There's your true Ashantee, gentlemen; there howl your pagans; whereyou ever find them, next door to you; under the long-flung shadow,and the snug patronising lee of churches.
For by some curiousfatality, as it is often noted of your metropolitan freebooters thatthey ever encamp around the halls of justice, so sinners, gentlemen,most abound in holiest vicinities.
"'Is that a friar passing?' said Don Pedro, looking downwards intothe crowded plazza, with humorous concern.
"'Well for our northern friend, Dame Isabella's Inquisition wanes inLima,' laughed Don Sebastian.
'Proceed, Senor.
'"'A moment! Pardon!' cried another of the company.
'In the name ofall us Limeese, I but desire to express to you, sir sailor, that wehave by no means overlooked your delicacy in not substituting presentLima for distant Venice in your corrupt comparison.
Oh! do not bowand look surprised; you know the proverb all along thiscoast--"Corrupt as Lima.
" It but bears out your saying, too;churches more plentiful than billiard-tables, and for ever open--and"Corrupt as Lima.
" So, too, Venice; I have been there; the holy cityof the blessed evangelist, St.
Mark!--St.
Dominic, purge it! Yourcup! Thanks: here I refill; now, you pour out again.
'"Freely depicted in his own vocation, gentlemen, the Canaller wouldmake a fine dramatic hero, so abundantly and picturesquely wicked ishe.
Like Mark Antony, for days and days along his green-turfed,flowery Nile, he indolently floats, openly toying with hisred-cheeked Cleopatra, ripening his apricot thigh upon the sunnydeck.
But ashore, all this effeminacy is dashed.
The brigandishguise which the Canaller so proudly sports; his slouched andgaily-ribboned hat betoken his grand features.
A terror to thesmiling innocence of the villages through which he floats; his swartvisage and bold swagger are not unshunned in cities.
Once a vagabondon his own canal, I have received good turns from one of theseCanallers; I thank him heartily; would fain be not ungrateful; but itis often one of the prime redeeming qualities of your man ofviolence, that at times he has as stiff an arm to back a poorstranger in a strait, as to plunder a wealthy one.
In sum,gentlemen, what the wildness of this canal life is, is emphaticallyevinced by this; that our wild whale-fishery contains so many of itsmost finished graduates, and that scarce any race of mankind, exceptSydney men, are so much distrusted by our whaling captains.
Nor doesit at all diminish the curiousness of this matter, that to manythousands of our rural boys and young men born along its line, theprobationary life of the Grand Canal furnishes the sole transitionbetween quietly reaping in a Christian corn-field, and recklesslyploughing the waters of the most barbaric seas.
"'I see! I see!' impetuously exclaimed Don Pedro, spilling hischicha upon his silvery ruffles.
'No need to travel! The world'sone Lima.
I had thought, now, that at your temperate North thegenerations were cold and holy as the hills.
--But the story.
'"I left off, gentlemen, where the Lakeman shook the backstay.
Hardly had he done so, when he was surrounded by the three juniormates and the four harpooneers, who all crowded him to the deck.
Butsliding down the ropes like baleful comets, the two Canallers rushedinto the uproar, and sought to drag their man out of it towards theforecastle.
Others of the sailors joined with them in this attempt,and a twisted turmoil ensued; while standing out of harm's way, thevaliant captain danced up and down with a whale-pike, calling uponhis officers to manhandle that atrocious scoundrel, and smoke himalong to the quarter-deck.
At intervals, he ran close up to therevolving border of the confusion, and prying into the heart of itwith his pike, sought to prick out the object of his resentment.
ButSteelkilt and his desperadoes were too much for them all; theysucceeded in gaining the forecastle deck, where, hastily slewingabout three or four large casks in a line with the windlass, thesesea-Parisians entrenched themselves behind the barricade.
"'Come out of that, ye pirates!' roared the captain, now menacingthem with a pistol in each hand, just brought to him by the steward.
'Come out of that, ye cut-throats!'"Steelkilt leaped on the barricade, and striding up and down there,defied the worst the pistols could do; but gave the captain tounderstand distinctly, that his (Steelkilt's) death would be thesignal for a murderous mutiny on the part of all hands.
Fearing inhis heart lest this might prove but too true, the captain a littledesisted, but still commanded the insurgents instantly to return totheir duty.
"'Will you promise not to touch us, if we do?' demanded theirringleader.
"'Turn to! turn to!--I make no promise;--to your duty! Do you wantto sink the ship, by knocking off at a time like this? Turn to!' andhe once more raised a pistol.
"'Sink the ship?' cried Steelkilt.
'Aye, let her sink.
Not a man ofus turns to, unless you swear not to raise a rope-yarn against us.
What say ye, men?' turning to his comrades.
A fierce cheer was theirresponse.
"The Lakeman now patrolled the barricade, all the while keeping hiseye on the Captain, and jerking out such sentences as these:--'It'snot our fault; we didn't want it; I told him to take his hammer away;it was boy's business; he might have known me before this; I told himnot to prick the buffalo; I believe I have broken a finger hereagainst his cursed jaw; ain't those mincing knives down in theforecastle there, men? look to those handspikes, my hearties.
Captain, by God, look to yourself; say the word; don't be a fool;forget it all; we are ready to turn to; treat us decently, and we'reyour men; but we won't be flogged.
'"'Turn to! I make no promises, turn to, I say!'"'Look ye, now,' cried the Lakeman, flinging out his arm towards him,'there are a few of us here (and I am one of them) who have shippedfor the cruise, d'ye see; now as you well know, sir, we can claim ourdischarge as soon as the anchor is down; so we don't want a row; it'snot our interest; we want to be peaceable; we are ready to work, butwe won't be flogged.
'"'Turn to!' roared the Captain.
"Steelkilt glanced round him a moment, and then said:--'I tell youwhat it is now, Captain, rather than kill ye, and be hung for such ashabby rascal, we won't lift a hand against ye unless ye attack us;but till you say the word about not flogging us, we don't do a hand'sturn.
'"'Down into the forecastle then, down with ye, I'll keep ye theretill ye're sick of it.
Down ye go.
'"'Shall we?' cried the ringleader to his men.
Most of them wereagainst it; but at length, in obedience to Steelkilt, they precededhim down into their dark den, growlingly disappearing, like bearsinto a cave.
"As the Lakeman's bare head was just level with the planks, theCaptain and his posse leaped the barricade, and rapidly drawing overthe slide of the scuttle, planted their group of hands upon it, andloudly called for the steward to bring the heavy brass padlockbelonging to the companionway.
Then opening the slide a little, the Captain whispered something downthe crack, closed it, and turned the key upon them--ten innumber--leaving on deck some twenty or more, who thus far hadremained neutral.
"All night a wide-awake watch was kept by all the officers, forwardand aft, especially about the forecastle scuttle and fore hatchway;at which last place it was feared the insurgents might emerge, afterbreaking through the bulkhead below.
But the hours of darknesspassed in peace; the men who still remained at their duty toilinghard at the pumps, whose clinking and clanking at intervals throughthe dreary night dismally resounded through the ship.
"At sunrise the Captain went forward, and knocking on the deck,summoned the prisoners to work; but with a yell they refused.
Waterwas then lowered down to them, and a couple of handfuls of biscuitwere tossed after it; when again turning the key upon them andpocketing it, the Captain returned to the quarter-deck.
Twice everyday for three days this was repeated; but on the fourth morning aconfused wrangling, and then a scuffling was heard, as the customarysummons was delivered; and suddenly four men burst up from theforecastle, saying they were ready to turn to.
The fetid closenessof the air, and a famishing diet, united perhaps to some fears ofultimate retribution, had constrained them to surrender atdiscretion.
Emboldened by this, the Captain reiterated his demand tothe rest, but Steelkilt shouted up to him a terrific hint to stop hisbabbling and betake himself where he belonged.
On the fifth morningthree others of the mutineers bolted up into the air from thedesperate arms below that sought to restrain them.
Only three wereleft.
"'Better turn to, now?' said the Captain with a heartless jeer.
"'Shut us up again, will ye!' cried Steelkilt.
"'Oh certainly,' the Captain, and the key clicked.
"It was at this point, gentlemen, that enraged by the defection ofseven of his former associates, and stung by the mocking voice thathad last hailed him, and maddened by his long entombment in a placeas black as the bowels of despair; it was then that Steelkiltproposed to the two Canallers, thus far apparently of one mind withhim, to burst out of their hole at the next summoning of thegarrison; and armed with their keen mincing knives (long, crescentic,heavy implements with a handle at each end) run amuck from thebowsprit to the taffrail; and if by any devilishness of desperationpossible, seize the ship.
For himself, he would do this, he said,whether they joined him or not.
That was the last night he shouldspend in that den.
But the scheme met with no opposition on the partof the other two; they swore they were ready for that, or for anyother mad thing, for anything in short but a surrender.
And what wasmore, they each insisted upon being the first man on deck, when thetime to make the rush should come.
But to this their leader asfiercely objected, reserving that priority for himself; particularlyas his two comrades would not yield, the one to the other, in thematter; and both of them could not be first, for the ladder would butadmit one man at a time.
And here, gentlemen, the foul play of thesemiscreants must come out.
"Upon hearing the frantic project of their leader, each in his ownseparate soul had suddenly lighted, it would seem, upon the samepiece of treachery, namely: to be foremost in breaking out, inorder to be the first of the three, though the last of the ten, tosurrender; and thereby secure whatever small chance of pardon suchconduct might merit.
But when Steelkilt made known his determinationstill to lead them to the last, they in some way, by some subtlechemistry of villany, mixed their before secret treacheries together;and when their leader fell into a doze, verbally opened their soulsto each other in three sentences; and bound the sleeper with cords,and gagged him with cords; and shrieked out for the Captain atmidnight.
"Thinking murder at hand, and smelling in the dark for the blood, heand all his armed mates and harpooneers rushed for the forecastle.
In a few minutes the scuttle was opened, and, bound hand and foot,the still struggling ringleader was shoved up into the air by hisperfidious allies, who at once claimed the honour of securing a manwho had been fully ripe for murder.
But all these were collared, anddragged along the deck like dead cattle; and, side by side, wereseized up into the mizzen rigging, like three quarters of meat, andthere they hung till morning.
'Damn ye,' cried the Captain, pacingto and fro before them, 'the vultures would not touch ye, yevillains!'"At sunrise he summoned all hands; and separating those who hadrebelled from those who had taken no part in the mutiny, he told theformer that he had a good mind to flog them all round--thought, uponthe whole, he would do so--he ought to--justice demanded it; but forthe present, considering their timely surrender, he would let them gowith a reprimand, which he accordingly administered in the vernacular.
"'But as for you, ye carrion rogues,' turning to the three men in therigging--'for you, I mean to mince ye up for the try-pots;' and,seizing a rope, he applied it with all his might to the backs of thetwo traitors, till they yelled no more, but lifelessly hung theirheads sideways, as the two crucified thieves are drawn.
"'My wrist is sprained with ye!' he cried, at last; 'but there isstill rope enough left for you, my fine bantam, that wouldn't giveup.
Take that gag from his mouth, and let us hear what he can sayfor himself.
'"For a moment the exhausted mutineer made a tremulous motion of hiscramped jaws, and then painfully twisting round his head, said in asort of hiss, 'What I say is this--and mind it well--if you flog me,I murder you!'"'Say ye so? then see how ye frighten me'--and the Captain drew offwith the rope to strike.
"'Best not,' hissed the Lakeman.
"'But I must,'--and the rope was once more drawn back for the stroke.
"Steelkilt here hissed out something, inaudible to all but theCaptain; who, to the amazement of all hands, started back, paced thedeck rapidly two or three times, and then suddenly throwing down hisrope, said, 'I won't do it--let him go--cut him down: d'ye hear?'But as the junior mates were hurrying to execute the order, a paleman, with a bandaged head, arrested them--Radney the chief mate.
Ever since the blow, he had lain in his berth; but that morning,hearing the tumult on the deck, he had crept out, and thus far hadwatched the whole scene.
Such was the state of his mouth, that hecould hardly speak; but mumbling something about his being willingand able to do what the captain dared not attempt, he snatched therope and advanced to his pinioned foe.
"'You are a coward!' hissed the Lakeman.
"'So I am, but take that.
' The mate was in the very act of striking,when another hiss stayed his uplifted arm.
He paused: and thenpausing no more, made good his word, spite of Steelkilt's threat,whatever that might have been.
The three men were then cut down, allhands were turned to, and, sullenly worked by the moody seamen, theiron pumps clanged as before.
"Just after dark that day, when one watch had retired below, a clamorwas heard in the forecastle; and the two trembling traitors runningup, besieged the cabin door, saying they durst not consort with thecrew.
Entreaties, cuffs, and kicks could not drive them back, so attheir own instance they were put down in the ship's run forsalvation.
Still, no sign of mutiny reappeared among the rest.
Onthe contrary, it seemed, that mainly at Steelkilt's instigation, theyhad resolved to maintain the strictest peacefulness, obey all ordersto the last, and, when the ship reached port, desert her in a body.
But in order to insure the speediest end to the voyage, they allagreed to another thing--namely, not to sing out for whales, in caseany should be discovered.
For, spite of her leak, and spite of all herother perils, the Town-Ho still maintained her mast-heads, and hercaptain was just as willing to lower for a fish that moment, as onthe day his craft first struck the cruising ground; and Radney the matewas quite as ready to change his berth for a boat, and with hisbandaged mouth seek to gag in death the vital jaw of the whale.
"But though the Lakeman had induced the seamen to adopt this sort ofpassiveness in their conduct, he kept his own counsel (at least tillall was over) concerning his own proper and private revenge upon theman who had stung him in the ventricles of his heart.
He was inRadney the chief mate's watch; and as if the infatuated man sought torun more than half way to meet his doom, after the scene at therigging, he insisted, against the express counsel of the captain,upon resuming the head of his watch at night.
Upon this, and one ortwo other circumstances, Steelkilt systematically built the plan ofhis revenge.
"During the night, Radney had an unseamanlike way of sitting on thebulwarks of the quarter-deck, and leaning his arm upon the gunwale ofthe boat which was hoisted up there, a little above the ship's side.
In this attitude, it was well known, he sometimes dozed.
There was aconsiderable vacancy between the boat and the ship, and down betweenthis was the sea.
Steelkilt calculated his time, and found that hisnext trick at the helm would come round at two o'clock, in themorning of the third day from that in which he had been betrayed.
Athis leisure, he employed the interval in braiding something verycarefully in his watches below.
"'What are you making there?' said a shipmate.
"'What do you think? what does it look like?'"'Like a lanyard for your bag; but it's an odd one, seems to me.
''Yes, rather oddish,' said the Lakeman, holding it at arm's lengthbefore him; 'but I think it will answer.
Shipmate, I haven't enoughtwine,--have you any?'"But there was none in the forecastle.
"'Then I must get some from old Rad;' and he rose to go aft.
"'You don't mean to go a begging to HIM!' said a sailor.
"'Why not? Do you think he won't do me a turn, when it's to helphimself in the end, shipmate?' and going to the mate, he looked athim quietly, and asked him for some twine to mend his hammock.
Itwas given him--neither twine nor lanyard were seen again; but thenext night an iron ball, closely netted, partly rolled from thepocket of the Lakeman's monkey jacket, as he was tucking the coatinto his hammock for a pillow.
Twenty-four hours after, his trick atthe silent helm--nigh to the man who was apt to doze over the gravealways ready dug to the seaman's hand--that fatal hour was then tocome; and in the fore-ordaining soul of Steelkilt, the mate wasalready stark and stretched as a corpse, with his forehead crushedin.
"But, gentlemen, a fool saved the would-be murderer from the bloodydeed he had planned.
Yet complete revenge he had, and without beingthe avenger.
For by a mysterious fatality, Heaven itself seemed tostep in to take out of his hands into its own the damning thing hewould have done.
"It was just between daybreak and sunrise of the morning of thesecond day, when they were washing down the decks, that a stupidTeneriffe man, drawing water in the main-chains, all at once shoutedout, 'There she rolls! there she rolls!' Jesu, what a whale! It wasMoby Dick.
"'Moby Dick!' cried Don Sebastian; 'St.
Dominic! Sir sailor, but dowhales have christenings? Whom call you Moby Dick?'"'A very white, and famous, and most deadly immortal monster,Don;--but that would be too long a story.
'"'How? how?' cried all the young Spaniards, crowding.
"'Nay, Dons, Dons--nay, nay! I cannot rehearse that now.
Let me getmore into the air, Sirs.
'"'The chicha! the chicha!' cried Don Pedro; 'our vigorous friend looksfaint;--fill up his empty glass!'"No need, gentlemen; one moment, and I proceed.
--Now, gentlemen, sosuddenly perceiving the snowy whale within fifty yards of theship--forgetful of the compact among the crew--in the excitement ofthe moment, the Teneriffe man had instinctively and involuntarilylifted his voice for the monster, though for some little time past ithad been plainly beheld from the three sullen mast-heads.
All wasnow a phrensy.
'The White Whale--the White Whale!' was the cry fromcaptain, mates, and harpooneers, who, undeterred by fearful rumours,were all anxious to capture so famous and precious a fish; while thedogged crew eyed askance, and with curses, the appalling beauty ofthe vast milky mass, that lit up by a horizontal spangling sun,shifted and glistened like a living opal in the blue morning sea.
Gentlemen, a strange fatality pervades the whole career of theseevents, as if verily mapped out before the world itself was charted.
The mutineer was the bowsman of the mate, and when fast to a fish, itwas his duty to sit next him, while Radney stood up with his lance inthe prow, and haul in or slacken the line, at the word of command.
Moreover, when the four boats were lowered, the mate's got the start;and none howled more fiercely with delight than did Steelkilt, as hestrained at his oar.
After a stiff pull, their harpooneer got fast,and, spear in hand, Radney sprang to the bow.
He was always afurious man, it seems, in a boat.
And now his bandaged cry was, tobeach him on the whale's topmost back.
Nothing loath, his bowsmanhauled him up and up, through a blinding foam that blent twowhitenesses together; till of a sudden the boat struck as against asunken ledge, and keeling over, spilled out the standing mate.
Thatinstant, as he fell on the whale's slippery back, the boat righted,and was dashed aside by the swell, while Radney was tossed over intothe sea, on the other flank of the whale.
He struck out through thespray, and, for an instant, was dimly seen through that veil, wildlyseeking to remove himself from the eye of Moby Dick.
But the whalerushed round in a sudden maelstrom; seized the swimmer between hisjaws; and rearing high up with him, plunged headlong again, and wentdown.
"Meantime, at the first tap of the boat's bottom, the Lakeman hadslackened the line, so as to drop astern from the whirlpool; calmlylooking on, he thought his own thoughts.
But a sudden, terrific,downward jerking of the boat, quickly brought his knife to the line.
He cut it; and the whale was free.
But, at some distance, Moby Dickrose again, with some tatters of Radney's red woollen shirt, caughtin the teeth that had destroyed him.
All four boats gave chaseagain; but the whale eluded them, and finally wholly disappeared.
"In good time, the Town-Ho reached her port--a savage, solitaryplace--where no civilized creature resided.
There, headed by theLakeman, all but five or six of the foremastmen deliberatelydeserted among the palms; eventually, as it turned out, seizing alarge double war-canoe of the savages, and setting sail for someother harbor.
"The ship's company being reduced to but a handful, the captaincalled upon the Islanders to assist him in the laborious business ofheaving down the ship to stop the leak.
But to such unrestingvigilance over their dangerous allies was this small band of whitesnecessitated, both by night and by day, and so extreme was the hardwork they underwent, that upon the vessel being ready again for sea,they were in such a weakened condition that the captain durst not putoff with them in so heavy a vessel.
After taking counsel with hisofficers, he anchored the ship as far off shore as possible; loadedand ran out his two cannon from the bows; stacked his muskets on thepoop; and warning the Islanders not to approach the ship at theirperil, took one man with him, and setting the sail of his bestwhale-boat, steered straight before the wind for Tahiti, five hundredmiles distant, to procure a reinforcement to his crew.
"On the fourth day of the sail, a large canoe was descried, whichseemed to have touched at a low isle of corals.
He steered away fromit; but the savage craft bore down on him; and soon the voice ofSteelkilt hailed him to heave to, or he would run him under water.
The captain presented a pistol.
With one foot on each prow of theyoked war-canoes, the Lakeman laughed him to scorn; assuring him thatif the pistol so much as clicked in the lock, he would bury him inbubbles and foam.
"'What do you want of me?' cried the captain.
"'Where are you bound? and for what are you bound?' demandedSteelkilt; 'no lies.
'"'I am bound to Tahiti for more men.
'"'Very good.
Let me board you a moment--I come in peace.
' With thathe leaped from the canoe, swam to the boat; and climbing the gunwale,stood face to face with the captain.
"'Cross your arms, sir; throw back your head.
Now, repeat after me.
As soon as Steelkilt leaves me, I swear to beach this boat on yonderisland, and remain there six days.
If I do not, may lightning strikeme!'"'A pretty scholar,' laughed the Lakeman.
'Adios, Senor!' andleaping into the sea, he swam back to his comrades.
"Watching the boat till it was fairly beached, and drawn up to theroots of the cocoa-nut trees, Steelkilt made sail again, and in duetime arrived at Tahiti, his own place of destination.
There, luckbefriended him; two ships were about to sail for France, and wereprovidentially in want of precisely that number of men which thesailor headed.
They embarked; and so for ever got the start oftheir former captain, had he been at all minded to work them legalretribution.
"Some ten days after the French ships sailed, the whale-boat arrived,and the captain was forced to enlist some of the more civilizedTahitians, who had been somewhat used to the sea.
Chartering a smallnative schooner, he returned with them to his vessel; and finding allright there, again resumed his cruisings.
"Where Steelkilt now is, gentlemen, none know; but upon the island ofNantucket, the widow of Radney still turns to the sea which refusesto give up its dead; still in dreams sees the awful white whale thatdestroyed him.
"'Are you through?' said Don Sebastian, quietly.
"'I am, Don.
'"'Then I entreat you, tell me if to the best of your own convictions,this your story is in substance really true? It is so passingwonderful! Did you get it from an unquestionable source? Bear withme if I seem to press.
'"'Also bear with all of us, sir sailor; for we all join in DonSebastian's suit,' cried the company, with exceeding interest.
"'Is there a copy of the Holy Evangelists in the Golden Inn,gentlemen?'"'Nay,' said Don Sebastian; 'but I know a worthy priest near by, whowill quickly procure one for me.
I go for it; but are you welladvised? this may grow too serious.
'"'Will you be so good as to bring the priest also, Don?'"'Though there are no Auto-da-Fe's in Lima now,' said one of thecompany to another; 'I fear our sailor friend runs risk of thearchiepiscopacy.
Let us withdraw more out of the moonlight.
I seeno need of this.
'"'Excuse me for running after you, Don Sebastian; but may I also begthat you will be particular in procuring the largest sizedEvangelists you can.
''This is the priest, he brings you the Evangelists,' said DonSebastian, gravely, returning with a tall and solemn figure.
"'Let me remove my hat.
Now, venerable priest, further into thelight, and hold the Holy Book before me that I may touch it.
"'So help me Heaven, and on my honour the story I have told ye,gentlemen, is in substance and its great items, true.
I know it tobe true; it happened on this ball; I trod the ship; I knew the crew;I have seen and talked with Steelkilt since the death of Radney.
'"Of the Monstrous Pictures of Whales.
I shall ere long paint to you as well as one can without canvas,something like the true form of the whale as he actually appears tothe eye of the whaleman when in his own absolute body the whale ismoored alongside the whale-ship so that he can be fairly stepped uponthere.
It may be worth while, therefore, previously to advert tothose curious imaginary portraits of him which even down to thepresent day confidently challenge the faith of the landsman.
It istime to set the world right in this matter, by proving such picturesof the whale all wrong.
It may be that the primal source of all those pictorial delusionswill be found among the oldest Hindoo, Egyptian, and Greciansculptures.
For ever since those inventive but unscrupulous timeswhen on the marble panellings of temples, the pedestals of statues,and on shields, medallions, cups, and coins, the dolphin was drawn inscales of chain-armor like Saladin's, and a helmeted head like St.
George's; ever since then has something of the same sort of licenseprevailed, not only in most popular pictures of the whale, but inmany scientific presentations of him.
Now, by all odds, the most ancient extant portrait anyways purportingto be the whale's, is to be found in the famous cavern-pagoda ofElephanta, in India.
The Brahmins maintain that in the almostendless sculptures of that immemorial pagoda, all the trades andpursuits, every conceivable avocation of man, were prefigured agesbefore any of them actually came into being.
No wonder then, that insome sort our noble profession of whaling should have been thereshadowed forth.
The Hindoo whale referred to, occurs in a separatedepartment of the wall, depicting the incarnation of Vishnu in theform of leviathan, learnedly known as the Matse Avatar.
But thoughthis sculpture is half man and half whale, so as only to give thetail of the latter, yet that small section of him is all wrong.
Itlooks more like the tapering tail of an anaconda, than the broad palmsof the true whale's majestic flukes.
But go to the old Galleries, and look now at a great Christianpainter's portrait of this fish; for he succeeds no better than theantediluvian Hindoo.
It is Guido's picture of Perseus rescuingAndromeda from the sea-monster or whale.
Where did Guido get themodel of such a strange creature as that? Nor does Hogarth, inpainting the same scene in his own "Perseus Descending," make out onewhit better.
The huge corpulence of that Hogarthian monsterundulates on the surface, scarcely drawing one inch of water.
It hasa sort of howdah on its back, and its distended tusked mouth intowhich the billows are rolling, might be taken for the Traitors' Gateleading from the Thames by water into the Tower.
Then, there are theProdromus whales of old Scotch Sibbald, and Jonah's whale, asdepicted in the prints of old Bibles and the cuts of old primers.
What shall be said of these? As for the book-binder's whale windinglike a vine-stalk round the stock of a descending anchor--as stampedand gilded on the backs and title-pages of many books both old andnew--that is a very picturesque but purely fabulous creature,imitated, I take it, from the like figures on antique vases.
Thoughuniversally denominated a dolphin, I nevertheless call thisbook-binder's fish an attempt at a whale; because it was so intendedwhen the device was first introduced.
It was introduced by an oldItalian publisher somewhere about the 15th century, during theRevival of Learning; and in those days, and even down to acomparatively late period, dolphins were popularly supposed to be aspecies of the Leviathan.
In the vignettes and other embellishments of some ancient books youwill at times meet with very curious touches at the whale, where allmanner of spouts, jets d'eau, hot springs and cold, Saratoga andBaden-Baden, come bubbling up from his unexhausted brain.
In thetitle-page of the original edition of the "Advancement of Learning"you will find some curious whales.
But quitting all these unprofessional attempts, let us glance atthose pictures of leviathan purporting to be sober, scientificdelineations, by those who know.
In old Harris's collection ofvoyages there are some plates of whales extracted from a Dutch bookof voyages, A.
D.
1671, entitled "A Whaling Voyage to Spitzbergen inthe ship Jonas in the Whale, Peter Peterson of Friesland, master.
"In one of those plates the whales, like great rafts of logs, arerepresented lying among ice-isles, with white bears running overtheir living backs.
In another plate, the prodigious blunder is madeof representing the whale with perpendicular flukes.
Then again, there is an imposing quarto, written by one CaptainColnett, a Post Captain in the English navy, entitled "A Voyage roundCape Horn into the South Seas, for the purpose of extending theSpermaceti Whale Fisheries.
" In this book is an outline purportingto be a "Picture of a Physeter or Spermaceti whale, drawn by scalefrom one killed on the coast of Mexico, August, 1793, and hoisted ondeck.
" I doubt not the captain had this veracious picture taken forthe benefit of his marines.
To mention but one thing about it, letme say that it has an eye which applied, according to theaccompanying scale, to a full grown sperm whale, would make the eyeof that whale a bow-window some five feet long.
Ah, my gallantcaptain, why did ye not give us Jonah looking out of that eye!Nor are the most conscientious compilations of Natural History forthe benefit of the young and tender, free from the same heinousnessof mistake.
Look at that popular work "Goldsmith's Animated Nature.
"In the abridged London edition of 1807, there are plates of analleged "whale" and a "narwhale.
" I do not wish to seem inelegant,but this unsightly whale looks much like an amputated sow; and, asfor the narwhale, one glimpse at it is enough to amaze one, that inthis nineteenth century such a hippogriff could be palmed for genuineupon any intelligent public of schoolboys.
Then, again, in 1825, Bernard Germain, Count de Lacepede, a greatnaturalist, published a scientific systemized whale book, wherein areseveral pictures of the different species of the Leviathan.
Allthese are not only incorrect, but the picture of the Mysticetus orGreenland whale (that is to say, the Right whale), even Scoresby, along experienced man as touching that species, declares not to haveits counterpart in nature.
But the placing of the cap-sheaf to all this blundering business wasreserved for the scientific Frederick Cuvier, brother to the famousBaron.
In 1836, he published a Natural History of Whales, in whichhe gives what he calls a picture of the Sperm Whale.
Before showingthat picture to any Nantucketer, you had best provide for yoursummary retreat from Nantucket.
In a word, Frederick Cuvier's SpermWhale is not a Sperm Whale, but a squash.
Of course, he never hadthe benefit of a whaling voyage (such men seldom have), but whence hederived that picture, who can tell? Perhaps he got it as hisscientific predecessor in the same field, Desmarest, got one of hisauthentic abortions; that is, from a Chinese drawing.
And what sortof lively lads with the pencil those Chinese are, many queer cups andsaucers inform us.
As for the sign-painters' whales seen in the streets hanging over theshops of oil-dealers, what shall be said of them? They are generallyRichard III.
whales, with dromedary humps, and very savage;breakfasting on three or four sailor tarts, that is whaleboats fullof mariners: their deformities floundering in seas of blood and bluepaint.
But these manifold mistakes in depicting the whale are not so verysurprising after all.
Consider! Most of the scientific drawingshave been taken from the stranded fish; and these are about ascorrect as a drawing of a wrecked ship, with broken back, wouldcorrectly represent the noble animal itself in all its undashed prideof hull and spars.
Though elephants have stood for theirfull-lengths, the living Leviathan has never yet fairly floatedhimself for his portrait.
The living whale, in his full majesty andsignificance, is only to be seen at sea in unfathomable waters; andafloat the vast bulk of him is out of sight, like a launchedline-of-battle ship; and out of that element it is a thing eternallyimpossible for mortal man to hoist him bodily into the air, so as topreserve all his mighty swells and undulations.
And, not to speak ofthe highly presumable difference of contour between a young suckingwhale and a full-grown Platonian Leviathan; yet, even in the case ofone of those young sucking whales hoisted to a ship's deck, such isthen the outlandish, eel-like, limbered, varying shape of him, thathis precise expression the devil himself could not catch.
But it may be fancied, that from the naked skeleton of the strandedwhale, accurate hints may be derived touching his true form.
Not atall.
For it is one of the more curious things about this Leviathan,that his skeleton gives very little idea of his general shape.
Though Jeremy Bentham's skeleton, which hangs for candelabra in thelibrary of one of his executors, correctly conveys the idea of aburly-browed utilitarian old gentleman, with all Jeremy's otherleading personal characteristics; yet nothing of this kind could beinferred from any leviathan's articulated bones.
In fact, as thegreat Hunter says, the mere skeleton of the whale bears the samerelation to the fully invested and padded animal as the insect doesto the chrysalis that so roundingly envelopes it.
This peculiarityis strikingly evinced in the head, as in some part of this book willbe incidentally shown.
It is also very curiously displayed in theside fin, the bones of which almost exactly answer to the bones of thehuman hand, minus only the thumb.
This fin has four regularbone-fingers, the index, middle, ring, and little finger.
But allthese are permanently lodged in their fleshy covering, as the humanfingers in an artificial covering.
"However recklessly the whale maysometimes serve us," said humorous Stubb one day, "he can never betruly said to handle us without mittens.
"For all these reasons, then, any way you may look at it, you mustneeds conclude that the great Leviathan is that one creature in theworld which must remain unpainted to the last.
True, one portraitmay hit the mark much nearer than another, but none can hit it withany very considerable degree of exactness.
So there is no earthlyway of finding out precisely what the whale really looks like.
Andthe only mode in which you can derive even a tolerable idea of hisliving contour, is by going a whaling yourself; but by so doing, yourun no small risk of being eternally stove and sunk by him.
Wherefore, it seems to me you had best not be too fastidious in yourcuriosity touching this Leviathan.
Of the Less Erroneous Pictures of Whales, and the True Pictures ofWhaling Scenes.
In connexion with the monstrous pictures of whales, I am stronglytempted here to enter upon those still more monstrous stories of themwhich are to be found in certain books, both ancient and modern,especially in Pliny, Purchas, Hackluyt, Harris, Cuvier, etc.
But Ipass that matter by.
I know of only four published outlines of the great Sperm Whale;Colnett's, Huggins's, Frederick Cuvier's, and Beale's.
In theprevious chapter Colnett and Cuvier have been referred to.
Huggins'sis far better than theirs; but, by great odds, Beale's is the best.
All Beale's drawings of this whale are good, excepting the middlefigure in the picture of three whales in various attitudes, cappinghis second chapter.
His frontispiece, boats attacking Sperm Whales,though no doubt calculated to excite the civil scepticism of someparlor men, is admirably correct and life-like in its general effect.
Some of the Sperm Whale drawings in J.
Ross Browne are prettycorrect in contour; but they are wretchedly engraved.
That is nothis fault though.
Of the Right Whale, the best outline pictures are in Scoresby; butthey are drawn on too small a scale to convey a desirable impression.
He has but one picture of whaling scenes, and this is a saddeficiency, because it is by such pictures only, when at all welldone, that you can derive anything like a truthful idea of the livingwhale as seen by his living hunters.
But, taken for all in all, by far the finest, though in some detailsnot the most correct, presentations of whales and whaling scenes tobe anywhere found, are two large French engravings, well executed,and taken from paintings by one Garnery.
Respectively, theyrepresent attacks on the Sperm and Right Whale.
In the firstengraving a noble Sperm Whale is depicted in full majesty of might,just risen beneath the boat from the profundities of the ocean, andbearing high in the air upon his back the terrific wreck of thestoven planks.
The prow of the boat is partially unbroken, and isdrawn just balancing upon the monster's spine; and standing in thatprow, for that one single incomputable flash of time, you behold anoarsman, half shrouded by the incensed boiling spout of the whale,and in the act of leaping, as if from a precipice.
The action of thewhole thing is wonderfully good and true.
The half-emptied line-tubfloats on the whitened sea; the wooden poles of the spilled harpoonsobliquely bob in it; the heads of the swimming crew are scatteredabout the whale in contrasting expressions of affright; while in theblack stormy distance the ship is bearing down upon the scene.
Serious fault might be found with the anatomical details of thiswhale, but let that pass; since, for the life of me, I could not drawso good a one.
In the second engraving, the boat is in the act of drawing alongsidethe barnacled flank of a large running Right Whale, that rolls hisblack weedy bulk in the sea like some mossy rock-slide from thePatagonian cliffs.
His jets are erect, full, and black like soot; sothat from so abounding a smoke in the chimney, you would think theremust be a brave supper cooking in the great bowels below.
Sea fowlsare pecking at the small crabs, shell-fish, and other sea candies andmaccaroni, which the Right Whale sometimes carries on his pestilentback.
And all the while the thick-lipped leviathan is rushingthrough the deep, leaving tons of tumultuous white curds in his wake,and causing the slight boat to rock in the swells like a skiff caughtnigh the paddle-wheels of an ocean steamer.
Thus, the foreground isall raging commotion; but behind, in admirable artistic contrast, isthe glassy level of a sea becalmed, the drooping unstarched sails ofthe powerless ship, and the inert mass of a dead whale, a conqueredfortress, with the flag of capture lazily hanging from the whale-poleinserted into his spout-hole.
Who Garnery the painter is, or was, I know not.
But my life for ithe was either practically conversant with his subject, or elsemarvellously tutored by some experienced whaleman.
The French arethe lads for painting action.
Go and gaze upon all the paintings ofEurope, and where will you find such a gallery of living andbreathing commotion on canvas, as in that triumphal hall atVersailles; where the beholder fights his way, pell-mell, through theconsecutive great battles of France; where every sword seems a flashof the Northern Lights, and the successive armed kings and Emperorsdash by, like a charge of crowned centaurs? Not wholly unworthy of aplace in that gallery, are these sea battle-pieces of Garnery.
The natural aptitude of the French for seizing the picturesqueness ofthings seems to be peculiarly evinced in what paintings andengravings they have of their whaling scenes.
With not one tenth ofEngland's experience in the fishery, and not the thousandth part ofthat of the Americans, they have nevertheless furnished both nationswith the only finished sketches at all capable of conveying the realspirit of the whale hunt.
For the most part, the English andAmerican whale draughtsmen seem entirely content with presenting themechanical outline of things, such as the vacant profile of thewhale; which, so far as picturesqueness of effect is concerned, isabout tantamount to sketching the profile of a pyramid.
EvenScoresby, the justly renowned Right whaleman, after giving us a stifffull length of the Greenland whale, and three or four delicateminiatures of narwhales and porpoises, treats us to a series ofclassical engravings of boat hooks, chopping knives, and grapnels;and with the microscopic diligence of a Leuwenhoeck submits to theinspection of a shivering world ninety-six fac-similes of magnifiedArctic snow crystals.
I mean no disparagement to the excellentvoyager (I honour him for a veteran), but in so important a matter itwas certainly an oversight not to have procured for every crystal asworn affidavit taken before a Greenland Justice of the Peace.
In addition to those fine engravings from Garnery, there are twoother French engravings worthy of note, by some one who subscribeshimself "H.
Durand.
" One of them, though not precisely adapted toour present purpose, nevertheless deserves mention on other accounts.
It is a quiet noon-scene among the isles of the Pacific; a Frenchwhaler anchored, inshore, in a calm, and lazily taking water onboard; the loosened sails of the ship, and the long leaves of thepalms in the background, both drooping together in the breezelessair.
The effect is very fine, when considered with reference to itspresenting the hardy fishermen under one of their few aspects oforiental repose.
The other engraving is quite a different affair:the ship hove-to upon the open sea, and in the very heart of theLeviathanic life, with a Right Whale alongside; the vessel (in theact of cutting-in) hove over to the monster as if to a quay; and aboat, hurriedly pushing off from this scene of activity, is aboutgiving chase to whales in the distance.
The harpoons and lances lielevelled for use; three oarsmen are just setting the mast in itshole; while from a sudden roll of the sea, the little craft standshalf-erect out of the water, like a rearing horse.
From the ship,the smoke of the torments of the boiling whale is going up like thesmoke over a village of smithies; and to windward, a black cloud,rising up with earnest of squalls and rains, seems to quicken theactivity of the excited seamen.
Of Whales in Paint; in Teeth; in Wood; in Sheet-Iron; in Stone; inMountains; in Stars.
On Tower-hill, as you go down to the London docks, you may have seena crippled beggar (or KEDGER, as the sailors say) holding a paintedboard before him, representing the tragic scene in which he lost hisleg.
There are three whales and three boats; and one of the boats(presumed to contain the missing leg in all its original integrity)is being crunched by the jaws of the foremost whale.
Any time theseten years, they tell me, has that man held up that picture, andexhibited that stump to an incredulous world.
But the time of hisjustification has now come.
His three whales are as good whales aswere ever published in Wapping, at any rate; and his stump asunquestionable a stump as any you will find in the western clearings.
But, though for ever mounted on that stump, never a stump-speechdoes the poor whaleman make; but, with downcast eyes, stands ruefullycontemplating his own amputation.
Throughout the Pacific, and also in Nantucket, and New Bedford, andSag Harbor, you will come across lively sketches of whales andwhaling-scenes, graven by the fishermen themselves on SpermWhale-teeth, or ladies' busks wrought out of the Right Whale-bone,and other like skrimshander articles, as the whalemen call thenumerous little ingenious contrivances they elaborately carve out ofthe rough material, in their hours of ocean leisure.
Some of themhave little boxes of dentistical-looking implements, speciallyintended for the skrimshandering business.
But, in general, theytoil with their jack-knives alone; and, with that almost omnipotenttool of the sailor, they will turn you out anything you please, inthe way of a mariner's fancy.
Long exile from Christendom and civilization inevitably restores aman to that condition in which God placed him, i.
e.
what is calledsavagery.
Your true whale-hunter is as much a savage as an Iroquois.
I myself am a savage, owning no allegiance but to the King of theCannibals; and ready at any moment to rebel against him.
Now, one of the peculiar characteristics of the savage in hisdomestic hours, is his wonderful patience of industry.
An ancientHawaiian war-club or spear-paddle, in its full multiplicity andelaboration of carving, is as great a trophy of human perseverance asa Latin lexicon.
For, with but a bit of broken sea-shell or ashark's tooth, that miraculous intricacy of wooden net-work has beenachieved; and it has cost steady years of steady application.
As with the Hawaiian savage, so with the white sailor-savage.
Withthe same marvellous patience, and with the same single shark's tooth,of his one poor jack-knife, he will carve you a bit of bonesculpture, not quite as workmanlike, but as close packed in itsmaziness of design, as the Greek savage, Achilles's shield; and fullof barbaric spirit and suggestiveness, as the prints of that fine oldDutch savage, Albert Durer.
Wooden whales, or whales cut in profile out of the small dark slabsof the noble South Sea war-wood, are frequently met with in theforecastles of American whalers.
Some of them are done with muchaccuracy.
At some old gable-roofed country houses you will see brass whaleshung by the tail for knockers to the road-side door.
When the porteris sleepy, the anvil-headed whale would be best.
But these knockingwhales are seldom remarkable as faithful essays.
On the spires ofsome old-fashioned churches you will see sheet-iron whales placedthere for weather-cocks; but they are so elevated, and besides thatare to all intents and purposes so labelled with "HANDS OFF!" youcannot examine them closely enough to decide upon their merit.
In bony, ribby regions of the earth, where at the base of high brokencliffs masses of rock lie strewn in fantastic groupings upon theplain, you will often discover images as of the petrified forms ofthe Leviathan partly merged in grass, which of a windy day breaksagainst them in a surf of green surges.
Then, again, in mountainous countries where the traveller iscontinually girdled by amphitheatrical heights; here and there fromsome lucky point of view you will catch passing glimpses of theprofiles of whales defined along the undulating ridges.
But you mustbe a thorough whaleman, to see these sights; and not only that, butif you wish to return to such a sight again, you must be sure andtake the exact intersecting latitude and longitude of your firststand-point, else so chance-like are such observations of the hills,that your precise, previous stand-point would require a laboriousre-discovery; like the Soloma Islands, which still remain incognita,though once high-ruffed Mendanna trod them and old Figuerachronicled them.
Nor when expandingly lifted by your subject, can you fail to traceout great whales in the starry heavens, and boats in pursuit of them;as when long filled with thoughts of war the Eastern nations sawarmies locked in battle among the clouds.
Thus at the North have Ichased Leviathan round and round the Pole with the revolutions of thebright points that first defined him to me.
And beneath theeffulgent Antarctic skies I have boarded the Argo-Navis, and joinedthe chase against the starry Cetus far beyond the utmost stretch ofHydrus and the Flying Fish.
With a frigate's anchors for my bridle-bitts and fasces of harpoonsfor spurs, would I could mount that whale and leap the topmost skies,to see whether the fabled heavens with all their countless tentsreally lie encamped beyond my mortal sight!Brit.
Steering north-eastward from the Crozetts, we fell in with vastmeadows of brit, the minute, yellow substance, upon which the RightWhale largely feeds.
For leagues and leagues it undulated round us,so that we seemed to be sailing through boundless fields of ripe andgolden wheat.
On the second day, numbers of Right Whales were seen, who, securefrom the attack of a Sperm Whaler like the Pequod, with open jawssluggishly swam through the brit, which, adhering to the fringingfibres of that wondrous Venetian blind in their mouths, was in thatmanner separated from the water that escaped at the lip.
As morning mowers, who side by side slowly and seethingly advancetheir scythes through the long wet grass of marshy meads; even sothese monsters swam, making a strange, grassy, cutting sound; andleaving behind them endless swaths of blue upon the yellow sea.
**That part of the sea known among whalemen as the "Brazil Banks" doesnot bear that name as the Banks of Newfoundland do, because of therebeing shallows and soundings there, but because of this remarkablemeadow-like appearance, caused by the vast drifts of brit continuallyfloating in those latitudes, where the Right Whale is often chased.
But it was only the sound they made as they parted the brit which atall reminded one of mowers.
Seen from the mast-heads, especiallywhen they paused and were stationary for a while, their vast blackforms looked more like lifeless masses of rock than anything else.
And as in the great hunting countries of India, the stranger at adistance will sometimes pass on the plains recumbent elephantswithout knowing them to be such, taking them for bare, blackenedelevations of the soil; even so, often, with him, who for the firsttime beholds this species of the leviathans of the sea.
And evenwhen recognised at last, their immense magnitude renders it veryhard really to believe that such bulky masses of overgrowth canpossibly be instinct, in all parts, with the same sort of life thatlives in a dog or a horse.
Indeed, in other respects, you can hardly regard any creatures of thedeep with the same feelings that you do those of the shore.
Forthough some old naturalists have maintained that all creatures of theland are of their kind in the sea; and though taking a broad generalview of the thing, this may very well be; yet coming to specialties,where, for example, does the ocean furnish any fish that indisposition answers to the sagacious kindness of the dog? Theaccursed shark alone can in any generic respect be said to bearcomparative analogy to him.
But though, to landsmen in general, the native inhabitants of theseas have ever been regarded with emotions unspeakably unsocial andrepelling; though we know the sea to be an everlasting terraincognita, so that Columbus sailed over numberless unknown worlds todiscover his one superficial western one; though, by vast odds, themost terrific of all mortal disasters have immemorially andindiscriminately befallen tens and hundreds of thousands of those whohave gone upon the waters; though but a moment's consideration willteach, that however baby man may brag of his science and skill, andhowever much, in a flattering future, that science and skill mayaugment; yet for ever and for ever, to the crack of doom, the seawill insult and murder him, and pulverize the stateliest, stiffestfrigate he can make; nevertheless, by the continual repetition ofthese very impressions, man has lost that sense of the full awfulnessof the sea which aboriginally belongs to it.
The first boat we read of, floated on an ocean, that with Portuguesevengeance had whelmed a whole world without leaving so much as awidow.
That same ocean rolls now; that same ocean destroyed thewrecked ships of last year.
Yea, foolish mortals, Noah's flood isnot yet subsided; two thirds of the fair world it yet covers.
Wherein differ the sea and the land, that a miracle upon one is not amiracle upon the other? Preternatural terrors rested upon theHebrews, when under the feet of Korah and his company the live groundopened and swallowed them up for ever; yet not a modern sun eversets, but in precisely the same manner the live sea swallows up shipsand crews.
But not only is the sea such a foe to man who is an alien to it, butit is also a fiend to its own off-spring; worse than the Persian hostwho murdered his own guests; sparing not the creatures which itselfhath spawned.
Like a savage tigress that tossing in the jungleoverlays her own cubs, so the sea dashes even the mightiest whalesagainst the rocks, and leaves them there side by side with the splitwrecks of ships.
No mercy, no power but its own controls it.
Panting and snorting like a mad battle steed that has lost its rider,the masterless ocean overruns the globe.
Consider the subtleness of the sea; how its most dreaded creaturesglide under water, unapparent for the most part, and treacherouslyhidden beneath the loveliest tints of azure.
Consider also thedevilish brilliance and beauty of many of its most remorselesstribes, as the dainty embellished shape of many species of sharks.
Consider, once more, the universal cannibalism of the sea; all whosecreatures prey upon each other, carrying on eternal war since theworld began.
Consider all this; and then turn to this green, gentle, and mostdocile earth; consider them both, the sea and the land; and do younot find a strange analogy to something in yourself? For as thisappalling ocean surrounds the verdant land, so in the soul of manthere lies one insular Tahiti, full of peace and joy, but encompassedby all the horrors of the half known life.
God keep thee! Push notoff from that isle, thou canst never return!Squid.
Slowly wading through the meadows of brit, the Pequod still held onher way north-eastward towards the island of Java; a gentle airimpelling her keel, so that in the surrounding serenity her threetall tapering masts mildly waved to that languid breeze, as threemild palms on a plain.
And still, at wide intervals in the silverynight, the lonely, alluring jet would be seen.
But one transparent blue morning, when a stillness almostpreternatural spread over the sea, however unattended with anystagnant calm; when the long burnished sun-glade on the waters seemeda golden finger laid across them, enjoining some secrecy; when theslippered waves whispered together as they softly ran on; in thisprofound hush of the visible sphere a strange spectre was seen byDaggoo from the main-mast-head.
In the distance, a great white mass lazily rose, and rising higherand higher, and disentangling itself from the azure, at last gleamedbefore our prow like a snow-slide, new slid from the hills.
Thusglistening for a moment, as slowly it subsided, and sank.
Then oncemore arose, and silently gleamed.
It seemed not a whale; and yet isthis Moby Dick? thought Daggoo.
Again the phantom went down, but onre-appearing once more, with a stiletto-like cry that startled everyman from his nod, the negro yelled out--"There! there again! thereshe breaches! right ahead! The White Whale, the White Whale!"Upon this, the seamen rushed to the yard-arms, as in swarming-timethe bees rush to the boughs.
Bare-headed in the sultry sun, Ahabstood on the bowsprit, and with one hand pushed far behind inreadiness to wave his orders to the helmsman, cast his eager glancein the direction indicated aloft by the outstretched motionless armof Daggoo.
Whether the flitting attendance of the one still and solitary jet hadgradually worked upon Ahab, so that he was now prepared to connectthe ideas of mildness and repose with the first sight of theparticular whale he pursued; however this was, or whether hiseagerness betrayed him; whichever way it might have been, no soonerdid he distinctly perceive the white mass, than with a quickintensity he instantly gave orders for lowering.
The four boats were soon on the water; Ahab's in advance, and allswiftly pulling towards their prey.
Soon it went down, and while,with oars suspended, we were awaiting its reappearance, lo! in thesame spot where it sank, once more it slowly rose.
Almost forgettingfor the moment all thoughts of Moby Dick, we now gazed at the mostwondrous phenomenon which the secret seas have hitherto revealed tomankind.
A vast pulpy mass, furlongs in length and breadth, of aglancing cream-colour, lay floating on the water, innumerable longarms radiating from its centre, and curling and twisting like a nestof anacondas, as if blindly to clutch at any hapless object withinreach.
No perceptible face or front did it have; no conceivabletoken of either sensation or instinct; but undulated there on thebillows, an unearthly, formless, chance-like apparition of life.
As with a low sucking sound it slowly disappeared again, Starbuckstill gazing at the agitated waters where it had sunk, with a wildvoice exclaimed--"Almost rather had I seen Moby Dick and fought him,than to have seen thee, thou white ghost!""What was it, Sir?" said Flask.
"The great live squid, which, they say, few whale-ships ever beheld,and returned to their ports to tell of it.
"But Ahab said nothing; turning his boat, he sailed back to thevessel; the rest as silently following.
Whatever superstitions the sperm whalemen in general have connectedwith the sight of this object, certain it is, that a glimpse of itbeing so very unusual, that circumstance has gone far to invest itwith portentousness.
So rarely is it beheld, that though one and allof them declare it to be the largest animated thing in the ocean, yetvery few of them have any but the most vague ideas concerning itstrue nature and form; notwithstanding, they believe it to furnish tothe sperm whale his only food.
For though other species of whalesfind their food above water, and may be seen by man in the act offeeding, the spermaceti whale obtains his whole food in unknown zonesbelow the surface; and only by inference is it that any one can tellof what, precisely, that food consists.
At times, when closelypursued, he will disgorge what are supposed to be the detached armsof the squid; some of them thus exhibited exceeding twenty and thirtyfeet in length.
They fancy that the monster to which these armsbelonged ordinarily clings by them to the bed of the ocean; and thatthe sperm whale, unlike other species, is supplied with teeth inorder to attack and tear it.
There seems some ground to imagine that the great Kraken of BishopPontoppodan may ultimately resolve itself into Squid.
The manner inwhich the Bishop describes it, as alternately rising and sinking,with some other particulars he narrates, in all this the twocorrespond.
But much abatement is necessary with respect to theincredible bulk he assigns it.
By some naturalists who have vaguely heard rumors of the mysteriouscreature, here spoken of, it is included among the class ofcuttle-fish, to which, indeed, in certain external respects it wouldseem to belong, but only as the Anak of the tribe.
The Line.
With reference to the whaling scene shortly to be described, as wellas for the better understanding of all similar scenes elsewherepresented, I have here to speak of the magical, sometimes horriblewhale-line.
The line originally used in the fishery was of the best hemp,slightly vapoured with tar, not impregnated with it, as in the case ofordinary ropes; for while tar, as ordinarily used, makes the hempmore pliable to the rope-maker, and also renders the rope itself moreconvenient to the sailor for common ship use; yet, not only would theordinary quantity too much stiffen the whale-line for the closecoiling to which it must be subjected; but as most seamen arebeginning to learn, tar in general by no means adds to the rope'sdurability or strength, however much it may give it compactness andgloss.
Of late years the Manilla rope has in the American fishery almostentirely superseded hemp as a material for whale-lines; for, thoughnot so durable as hemp, it is stronger, and far more soft andelastic; and I will add (since there is an aesthetics in all things),is much more handsome and becoming to the boat, than hemp.
Hemp is adusky, dark fellow, a sort of Indian; but Manilla is as agolden-haired Circassian to behold.
The whale-line is only two-thirds of an inch in thickness.
At firstsight, you would not think it so strong as it really is.
Byexperiment its one and fifty yarns will each suspend a weight of onehundred and twenty pounds; so that the whole rope will bear a strainnearly equal to three tons.
In length, the common sperm whale-linemeasures something over two hundred fathoms.
Towards the stern ofthe boat it is spirally coiled away in the tub, not like theworm-pipe of a still though, but so as to form one round,cheese-shaped mass of densely bedded "sheaves," or layers ofconcentric spiralizations, without any hollow but the "heart," orminute vertical tube formed at the axis of the cheese.
As the leasttangle or kink in the coiling would, in running out, infallibly takesomebody's arm, leg, or entire body off, the utmost precaution isused in stowing the line in its tub.
Some harpooneers will consumealmost an entire morning in this business, carrying the line highaloft and then reeving it downwards through a block towards the tub,so as in the act of coiling to free it from all possible wrinkles andtwists.
In the English boats two tubs are used instead of one; the same linebeing continuously coiled in both tubs.
There is some advantage inthis; because these twin-tubs being so small they fit more readilyinto the boat, and do not strain it so much; whereas, the Americantub, nearly three feet in diameter and of proportionate depth, makesa rather bulky freight for a craft whose planks are but one half-inchin thickness; for the bottom of the whale-boat is like critical ice,which will bear up a considerable distributed weight, but not verymuch of a concentrated one.
When the painted canvas cover is clappedon the American line-tub, the boat looks as if it were pulling offwith a prodigious great wedding-cake to present to the whales.
Both ends of the line are exposed; the lower end terminating in aneye-splice or loop coming up from the bottom against the side of thetub, and hanging over its edge completely disengaged from everything.
This arrangement of the lower end is necessary on two accounts.
First: In order to facilitate the fastening to it of an additionalline from a neighboring boat, in case the stricken whale should soundso deep as to threaten to carry off the entire line originallyattached to the harpoon.
In these instances, the whale of course isshifted like a mug of ale, as it were, from the one boat to theother; though the first boat always hovers at hand to assist itsconsort.
Second: This arrangement is indispensable for commonsafety's sake; for were the lower end of the line in any way attachedto the boat, and were the whale then to run the line out to the endalmost in a single, smoking minute as he sometimes does, he would notstop there, for the doomed boat would infallibly be dragged downafter him into the profundity of the sea; and in that case notown-crier would ever find her again.
Before lowering the boat for the chase, the upper end of the line istaken aft from the tub, and passing round the loggerhead there, isagain carried forward the entire length of the boat, restingcrosswise upon the loom or handle of every man's oar, so that it jogsagainst his wrist in rowing; and also passing between the men, asthey alternately sit at the opposite gunwales, to the leaded chocksor grooves in the extreme pointed prow of the boat, where a woodenpin or skewer the size of a common quill, prevents it from slippingout.
From the chocks it hangs in a slight festoon over the bows, andis then passed inside the boat again; and some ten or twenty fathoms(called box-line) being coiled upon the box in the bows, it continuesits way to the gunwale still a little further aft, and is thenattached to the short-warp--the rope which is immediately connectedwith the harpoon; but previous to that connexion, the short-warp goesthrough sundry mystifications too tedious to detail.
Thus the whale-line folds the whole boat in its complicated coils,twisting and writhing around it in almost every direction.
All theoarsmen are involved in its perilous contortions; so that to thetimid eye of the landsman, they seem as Indian jugglers, with thedeadliest snakes sportively festooning their limbs.
Nor can any sonof mortal woman, for the first time, seat himself amid those hempenintricacies, and while straining his utmost at the oar, bethink himthat at any unknown instant the harpoon may be darted, and all thesehorrible contortions be put in play like ringed lightnings; he cannotbe thus circumstanced without a shudder that makes the very marrow inhis bones to quiver in him like a shaken jelly.
Yet habit--strangething! what cannot habit accomplish?--Gayer sallies, more merrymirth, better jokes, and brighter repartees, you never heard overyour mahogany, than you will hear over the half-inch white cedar ofthe whale-boat, when thus hung in hangman's nooses; and, like the sixburghers of Calais before King Edward, the six men composing the crewpull into the jaws of death, with a halter around every neck, as youmay say.
Perhaps a very little thought will now enable you to account forthose repeated whaling disasters--some few of which are casuallychronicled--of this man or that man being taken out of the boat bythe line, and lost.
For, when the line is darting out, to be seatedthen in the boat, is like being seated in the midst of the manifoldwhizzings of a steam-engine in full play, when every flying beam, andshaft, and wheel, is grazing you.
It is worse; for you cannot sitmotionless in the heart of these perils, because the boat is rockinglike a cradle, and you are pitched one way and the other, without theslightest warning; and only by a certain self-adjusting buoyancy andsimultaneousness of volition and action, can you escape being made aMazeppa of, and run away with where the all-seeing sun himself couldnever pierce you out.
Again: as the profound calm which only apparently precedes andprophesies of the storm, is perhaps more awful than the storm itself;for, indeed, the calm is but the wrapper and envelope of the storm;and contains it in itself, as the seemingly harmless rifle holds thefatal powder, and the ball, and the explosion; so the graceful reposeof the line, as it silently serpentines about the oarsmen beforebeing brought into actual play--this is a thing which carries more oftrue terror than any other aspect of this dangerous affair.
But whysay more? All men live enveloped in whale-lines.
All are born withhalters round their necks; but it is only when caught in the swift,sudden turn of death, that mortals realize the silent, subtle,ever-present perils of life.
And if you be a philosopher, thoughseated in the whale-boat, you would not at heart feel one whit moreof terror, than though seated before your evening fire with a poker,and not a harpoon, by your side.
Stubb Kills a Whale.
If to Starbuck the apparition of the Squid was a thing of portents,to Queequeg it was quite a different object.
"When you see him 'quid," said the savage, honing his harpoon in thebow of his hoisted boat, "then you quick see him 'parm whale.
"The next day was exceedingly still and sultry, and with nothingspecial to engage them, the Pequod's crew could hardly resist thespell of sleep induced by such a vacant sea.
For this part of theIndian Ocean through which we then were voyaging is not what whalemencall a lively ground; that is, it affords fewer glimpses ofporpoises, dolphins, flying-fish, and other vivacious denizens ofmore stirring waters, than those off the Rio de la Plata, or thein-shore ground off Peru.
It was my turn to stand at the foremast-head; and with my shouldersleaning against the slackened royal shrouds, to and fro I idly swayedin what seemed an enchanted air.
No resolution could withstand it;in that dreamy mood losing all consciousness, at last my soul wentout of my body; though my body still continued to sway as a pendulumwill, long after the power which first moved it is withdrawn.
Ere forgetfulness altogether came over me, I had noticed that theseamen at the main and mizzen-mast-heads were already drowsy.
Sothat at last all three of us lifelessly swung from the spars, and forevery swing that we made there was a nod from below from theslumbering helmsman.
The waves, too, nodded their indolent crests;and across the wide trance of the sea, east nodded to west, and thesun over all.
Suddenly bubbles seemed bursting beneath my closed eyes; like vicesmy hands grasped the shrouds; some invisible, gracious agencypreserved me; with a shock I came back to life.
And lo! close underour lee, not forty fathoms off, a gigantic Sperm Whale lay rolling inthe water like the capsized hull of a frigate, his broad, glossyback, of an Ethiopian hue, glistening in the sun's rays like amirror.
But lazily undulating in the trough of the sea, and ever andanon tranquilly spouting his vapoury jet, the whale looked like aportly burgher smoking his pipe of a warm afternoon.
But that pipe,poor whale, was thy last.
As if struck by some enchanter's wand, thesleepy ship and every sleeper in it all at once started intowakefulness; and more than a score of voices from all parts of thevessel, simultaneously with the three notes from aloft, shouted forththe accustomed cry, as the great fish slowly and regularly spoutedthe sparkling brine into the air.
"Clear away the boats! Luff!" cried Ahab.
And obeying his ownorder, he dashed the helm down before the helmsman could handle thespokes.
The sudden exclamations of the crew must have alarmed the whale; andere the boats were down, majestically turning, he swam away to theleeward, but with such a steady tranquillity, and making so fewripples as he swam, that thinking after all he might not as yet bealarmed, Ahab gave orders that not an oar should be used, and no manmust speak but in whispers.
So seated like Ontario Indians on thegunwales of the boats, we swiftly but silently paddled along; thecalm not admitting of the noiseless sails being set.
Presently, aswe thus glided in chase, the monster perpendicularly flitted his tailforty feet into the air, and then sank out of sight like a towerswallowed up.
"There go flukes!" was the cry, an announcement immediately followedby Stubb's producing his match and igniting his pipe, for now arespite was granted.
After the full interval of his sounding hadelapsed, the whale rose again, and being now in advance of thesmoker's boat, and much nearer to it than to any of the others, Stubbcounted upon the honour of the capture.
It was obvious, now, that thewhale had at length become aware of his pursuers.
All silence ofcautiousness was therefore no longer of use.
Paddles were dropped,and oars came loudly into play.
And still puffing at his pipe, Stubbcheered on his crew to the assault.
Yes, a mighty change had come over the fish.
All alive to hisjeopardy, he was going "head out"; that part obliquely projectingfrom the mad yeast which he brewed.
**It will be seen in some other place of what a very light substancethe entire interior of the sperm whale's enormous head consists.
Though apparently the most massive, it is by far the most buoyantpart about him.
So that with ease he elevates it in the air, andinvariably does so when going at his utmost speed.
Besides, such isthe breadth of the upper part of the front of his head, and such thetapering cut-water formation of the lower part, that by obliquelyelevating his head, he thereby may be said to transform himself froma bluff-bowed sluggish galliot into a sharppointed New Yorkpilot-boat.
"Start her, start her, my men! Don't hurry yourselves; take plentyof time--but start her; start her like thunder-claps, that's all,"cried Stubb, spluttering out the smoke as he spoke.
"Start her, now;give 'em the long and strong stroke, Tashtego.
Start her, Tash, myboy--start her, all; but keep cool, keep cool--cucumbers is theword--easy, easy--only start her like grim death and grinning devils,and raise the buried dead perpendicular out of their graves,boys--that's all.
Start her!""Woo-hoo! Wa-hee!" screamed the Gay-Header in reply, raising someold war-whoop to the skies; as every oarsman in the strained boatinvoluntarily bounced forward with the one tremendous leading strokewhich the eager Indian gave.
But his wild screams were answered by others quite as wild.
"Kee-hee! Kee-hee!" yelled Daggoo, straining forwards and backwardson his seat, like a pacing tiger in his cage.
"Ka-la! Koo-loo!" howled Queequeg, as if smacking his lips over amouthful of Grenadier's steak.
And thus with oars and yells thekeels cut the sea.
Meanwhile, Stubb retaining his place in thevan, still encouraged his men to the onset, all the while puffing thesmoke from his mouth.
Like desperadoes they tugged and theystrained, till the welcome cry was heard--"Stand up, Tashtego!--giveit to him!" The harpoon was hurled.
"Stern all!" The oarsmenbacked water; the same moment something went hot and hissing alongevery one of their wrists.
It was the magical line.
An instantbefore, Stubb had swiftly caught two additional turns with it roundthe loggerhead, whence, by reason of its increased rapid circlings, ahempen blue smoke now jetted up and mingled with the steady fumesfrom his pipe.
As the line passed round and round the loggerhead; soalso, just before reaching that point, it blisteringly passed throughand through both of Stubb's hands, from which the hand-cloths, orsquares of quilted canvas sometimes worn at these times, hadaccidentally dropped.
It was like holding an enemy's sharp two-edgedsword by the blade, and that enemy all the time striving to wrest itout of your clutch.
"Wet the line! wet the line!" cried Stubb to the tub oarsman (himseated by the tub) who, snatching off his hat, dashed sea-water intoit.
* More turns were taken, so that the line began holding its place.
The boat now flew through the boiling water like a shark all fins.
Stubb and Tashtego here changed places--stem for stern--a staggeringbusiness truly in that rocking commotion.
*Partly to show the indispensableness of this act, it may here bestated, that, in the old Dutch fishery, a mop was used to dash therunning line with water; in many other ships, a wooden piggin, orbailer, is set apart for that purpose.
Your hat, however, is themost convenient.
From the vibrating line extending the entire length of the upper partof the boat, and from its now being more tight than a harpstring, youwould have thought the craft had two keels--one cleaving the water,the other the air--as the boat churned on through both opposingelements at once.
A continual cascade played at the bows; aceaseless whirling eddy in her wake; and, at the slightest motionfrom within, even but of a little finger, the vibrating, crackingcraft canted over her spasmodic gunwale into the sea.
Thus theyrushed; each man with might and main clinging to his seat, to preventbeing tossed to the foam; and the tall form of Tashtego at thesteering oar crouching almost double, in order to bring down hiscentre of gravity.
Whole Atlantics and Pacifics seemed passed asthey shot on their way, till at length the whale somewhat slackenedhis flight.
"Haul in--haul in!" cried Stubb to the bowsman! and, facing roundtowards the whale, all hands began pulling the boat up to him, whileyet the boat was being towed on.
Soon ranging up by his flank,Stubb, firmly planting his knee in the clumsy cleat, darted dartafter dart into the flying fish; at the word of command, the boatalternately sterning out of the way of the whale's horrible wallow,and then ranging up for another fling.
The red tide now poured from all sides of the monster like brooksdown a hill.
His tormented body rolled not in brine but in blood,which bubbled and seethed for furlongs behind in their wake.
Theslanting sun playing upon this crimson pond in the sea, sent backits reflection into every face, so that they all glowed to each otherlike red men.
And all the while, jet after jet of white smoke wasagonizingly shot from the spiracle of the whale, and vehement puffafter puff from the mouth of the excited headsman; as at every dart,hauling in upon his crooked lance (by the line attached to it), Stubbstraightened it again and again, by a few rapid blows against thegunwale, then again and again sent it into the whale.
"Pull up--pull up!" he now cried to the bowsman, as the waning whalerelaxed in his wrath.
"Pull up!--close to!" and the boat rangedalong the fish's flank.
When reaching far over the bow, Stubb slowlychurned his long sharp lance into the fish, and kept it there,carefully churning and churning, as if cautiously seeking to feelafter some gold watch that the whale might have swallowed, and whichhe was fearful of breaking ere he could hook it out.
But that goldwatch he sought was the innermost life of the fish.
And now it isstruck; for, starting from his trance into that unspeakable thingcalled his "flurry," the monster horribly wallowed in his blood,overwrapped himself in impenetrable, mad, boiling spray, so that theimperilled craft, instantly dropping astern, had much ado blindly tostruggle out from that phrensied twilight into the clear air of theday.
And now abating in his flurry, the whale once more rolled out intoview; surging from side to side; spasmodically dilating andcontracting his spout-hole, with sharp, cracking, agonizedrespirations.
At last, gush after gush of clotted red gore, as if ithad been the purple lees of red wine, shot into the frighted air; andfalling back again, ran dripping down his motionless flanks intothe sea.
His heart had burst!"He's dead, Mr.
Stubb," said Daggoo.
"Yes; both pipes smoked out!" and withdrawing his own from his mouth,Stubb scattered the dead ashes over the water; and, for a moment,stood thoughtfully eyeing the vast corpse he had made.
The Dart.
A word concerning an incident in the last chapter.
According to the invariable usage of the fishery, the whale-boatpushes off from the ship, with the headsman or whale-killer astemporary steersman, and the harpooneer or whale-fastener pulling theforemost oar, the one known as the harpooneer-oar.
Now it needs astrong, nervous arm to strike the first iron into the fish; foroften, in what is called a long dart, the heavy implement has to beflung to the distance of twenty or thirty feet.
But howeverprolonged and exhausting the chase, the harpooneer is expected topull his oar meanwhile to the uttermost; indeed, he is expected toset an example of superhuman activity to the rest, not only byincredible rowing, but by repeated loud and intrepid exclamations;and what it is to keep shouting at the top of one's compass, whileall the other muscles are strained and half started--what that isnone know but those who have tried it.
For one, I cannot bawl veryheartily and work very recklessly at one and the same time.
In thisstraining, bawling state, then, with his back to the fish, all atonce the exhausted harpooneer hears the exciting cry--"Stand up, andgive it to him!" He now has to drop and secure his oar, turn roundon his centre half way, seize his harpoon from the crotch, and withwhat little strength may remain, he essays to pitch it somehow intothe whale.
No wonder, taking the whole fleet of whalemen in a body,that out of fifty fair chances for a dart, not five are successful;no wonder that so many hapless harpooneers are madly cursed anddisrated; no wonder that some of them actually burst theirblood-vessels in the boat; no wonder that some sperm whalemen areabsent four years with four barrels; no wonder that to many shipowners, whaling is but a losing concern; for it is the harpooneerthat makes the voyage, and if you take the breath out of his body howcan you expect to find it there when most wanted!Again, if the dart be successful, then at the second criticalinstant, that is, when the whale starts to run, the boatheader andharpooneer likewise start to running fore and aft, to the imminentjeopardy of themselves and every one else.
It is then they changeplaces; and the headsman, the chief officer of the little craft,takes his proper station in the bows of the boat.
Now, I care not who maintains the contrary, but all this is bothfoolish and unnecessary.
The headsman should stay in the bows fromfirst to last; he should both dart the harpoon and the lance, and norowing whatever should be expected of him, except under circumstancesobvious to any fisherman.
I know that this would sometimes involve aslight loss of speed in the chase; but long experience in variouswhalemen of more than one nation has convinced me that in the vastmajority of failures in the fishery, it has not by any means been somuch the speed of the whale as the before described exhaustion of theharpooneer that has caused them.
To insure the greatest efficiency in the dart, the harpooneers ofthis world must start to their feet from out of idleness, and notfrom out of toil.
The Crotch.
Out of the trunk, the branches grow; out of them, the twigs.
So, inproductive subjects, grow the chapters.
The crotch alluded to on a previous page deserves independentmention.
It is a notched stick of a peculiar form, some two feet inlength, which is perpendicularly inserted into the starboard gunwalenear the bow, for the purpose of furnishing a rest for the woodenextremity of the harpoon, whose other naked, barbed end slopinglyprojects from the prow.
Thereby the weapon is instantly at hand toits hurler, who snatches it up as readily from its rest as abackwoodsman swings his rifle from the wall.
It is customary to havetwo harpoons reposing in the crotch, respectively called the firstand second irons.
But these two harpoons, each by its own cord, are both connected withthe line; the object being this: to dart them both, if possible, oneinstantly after the other into the same whale; so that if, in thecoming drag, one should draw out, the other may still retain a hold.
It is a doubling of the chances.
But it very often happens thatowing to the instantaneous, violent, convulsive running of the whaleupon receiving the first iron, it becomes impossible for theharpooneer, however lightning-like in his movements, to pitch thesecond iron into him.
Nevertheless, as the second iron is alreadyconnected with the line, and the line is running, hence that weaponmust, at all events, be anticipatingly tossed out of the boat,somehow and somewhere; else the most terrible jeopardy would involveall hands.
Tumbled into the water, it accordingly is in such cases;the spare coils of box line (mentioned in a preceding chapter) makingthis feat, in most instances, prudently practicable.
But thiscritical act is not always unattended with the saddest and most fatalcasualties.
Furthermore: you must know that when the second iron is thrownoverboard, it thenceforth becomes a dangling, sharp-edged terror,skittishly curvetting about both boat and whale, entangling thelines, or cutting them, and making a prodigious sensation in alldirections.
Nor, in general, is it possible to secure it again untilthe whale is fairly captured and a corpse.
Consider, now, how it must be in the case of four boats all engagingone unusually strong, active, and knowing whale; when owing to thesequalities in him, as well as to the thousand concurring accidents ofsuch an audacious enterprise, eight or ten loose second irons may besimultaneously dangling about him.
For, of course, each boat issupplied with several harpoons to bend on to the line should thefirst one be ineffectually darted without recovery.
All theseparticulars are faithfully narrated here, as they will not fail toelucidate several most important, however intricate passages, inscenes hereafter to be painted.
Stubb's Supper.
Stubb's whale had been killed some distance from the ship.
It was acalm; so, forming a tandem of three boats, we commenced the slowbusiness of towing the trophy to the Pequod.
And now, as we eighteenmen with our thirty-six arms, and one hundred and eighty thumbs andfingers, slowly toiled hour after hour upon that inert, sluggishcorpse in the sea; and it seemed hardly to budge at all, except atlong intervals; good evidence was hereby furnished of theenormousness of the mass we moved.
For, upon the great canal ofHang-Ho, or whatever they call it, in China, four or five laborers onthe foot-path will draw a bulky freighted junk at the rate of a milean hour; but this grand argosy we towed heavily forged along, as ifladen with pig-lead in bulk.
Darkness came on; but three lights up and down in the Pequod'smain-rigging dimly guided our way; till drawing nearer we saw Ahabdropping one of several more lanterns over the bulwarks.
Vacantlyeyeing the heaving whale for a moment, he issued the usual orders forsecuring it for the night, and then handing his lantern to a seaman,went his way into the cabin, and did not come forward again untilmorning.
Though, in overseeing the pursuit of this whale, Captain Ahab hadevinced his customary activity, to call it so; yet now that thecreature was dead, some vague dissatisfaction, or impatience, ordespair, seemed working in him; as if the sight of that dead bodyreminded him that Moby Dick was yet to be slain; and though athousand other whales were brought to his ship, all that would notone jot advance his grand, monomaniac object.
Very soon you wouldhave thought from the sound on the Pequod's decks, that all handswere preparing to cast anchor in the deep; for heavy chains are beingdragged along the deck, and thrust rattling out of the port-holes.
But by those clanking links, the vast corpse itself, not the ship, isto be moored.
Tied by the head to the stern, and by the tail to thebows, the whale now lies with its black hull close to the vessel'sand seen through the darkness of the night, which obscured the sparsand rigging aloft, the two--ship and whale, seemed yoked togetherlike colossal bullocks, whereof one reclines while the other remainsstanding.
**A little item may as well be related here.
The strongest and mostreliable hold which the ship has upon the whale when mooredalongside, is by the flukes or tail; and as from its greater densitythat part is relatively heavier than any other (excepting theside-fins), its flexibility even in death, causes it to sink lowbeneath the surface; so that with the hand you cannot get at it fromthe boat, in order to put the chain round it.
But this difficulty isingeniously overcome: a small, strong line is prepared with a woodenfloat at its outer end, and a weight in its middle, while the otherend is secured to the ship.
By adroit management the wooden float ismade to rise on the other side of the mass, so that now havinggirdled the whale, the chain is readily made to follow suit; andbeing slipped along the body, is at last locked fast round thesmallest part of the tail, at the point of junction with its broadflukes or lobes.
If moody Ahab was now all quiescence, at least so far as could beknown on deck, Stubb, his second mate, flushed with conquest,betrayed an unusual but still good-natured excitement.
Such anunwonted bustle was he in that the staid Starbuck, his officialsuperior, quietly resigned to him for the time the sole management ofaffairs.
One small, helping cause of all this liveliness in Stubb,was soon made strangely manifest.
Stubb was a high liver; he wassomewhat intemperately fond of the whale as a flavorish thing to hispalate.
"A steak, a steak, ere I sleep! You, Daggoo! overboard you go, andcut me one from his small!"Here be it known, that though these wild fishermen do not, as ageneral thing, and according to the great military maxim, make theenemy defray the current expenses of the war (at least beforerealizing the proceeds of the voyage), yet now and then you find someof these Nantucketers who have a genuine relish for that particularpart of the Sperm Whale designated by Stubb; comprising the taperingextremity of the body.
About midnight that steak was cut and cooked; and lighted by twolanterns of sperm oil, Stubb stoutly stood up to his spermacetisupper at the capstan-head, as if that capstan were a sideboard.
Norwas Stubb the only banqueter on whale's flesh that night.
Minglingtheir mumblings with his own mastications, thousands on thousands ofsharks, swarming round the dead leviathan, smackingly feasted on itsfatness.
The few sleepers below in their bunks were often startledby the sharp slapping of their tails against the hull, within a fewinches of the sleepers' hearts.
Peering over the side you could justsee them (as before you heard them) wallowing in the sullen, blackwaters, and turning over on their backs as they scooped out hugeglobular pieces of the whale of the bigness of a human head.
Thisparticular feat of the shark seems all but miraculous.
How at suchan apparently unassailable surface, they contrive to gouge out suchsymmetrical mouthfuls, remains a part of the universal problem of allthings.
The mark they thus leave on the whale, may best be likenedto the hollow made by a carpenter in countersinking for a screw.
Though amid all the smoking horror and diabolism of a sea-fight,sharks will be seen longingly gazing up to the ship's decks, likehungry dogs round a table where red meat is being carved, ready tobolt down every killed man that is tossed to them; and though, whilethe valiant butchers over the deck-table are thus cannibally carvingeach other's live meat with carving-knives all gilded and tasselled,the sharks, also, with their jewel-hilted mouths, are quarrelsomelycarving away under the table at the dead meat; and though, were youto turn the whole affair upside down, it would still be pretty muchthe same thing, that is to say, a shocking sharkish business enoughfor all parties; and though sharks also are the invariable outridersof all slave ships crossing the Atlantic, systematically trottingalongside, to be handy in case a parcel is to be carried anywhere, ora dead slave to be decently buried; and though one or two other likeinstances might be set down, touching the set terms, places, andoccasions, when sharks do most socially congregate, and mosthilariously feast; yet is there no conceivable time or occasion whenyou will find them in such countless numbers, and in gayer or morejovial spirits, than around a dead sperm whale, moored by night to awhaleship at sea.
If you have never seen that sight, then suspendyour decision about the propriety of devil-worship, and theexpediency of conciliating the devil.
But, as yet, Stubb heeded not the mumblings of the banquet that wasgoing on so nigh him, no more than the sharks heeded the smacking ofhis own epicurean lips.
"Cook, cook!--where's that old Fleece?" he cried at length, wideninghis legs still further, as if to form a more secure base for hissupper; and, at the same time darting his fork into the dish, as ifstabbing with his lance; "cook, you cook!--sail this way, cook!"The old black, not in any very high glee at having been previouslyroused from his warm hammock at a most unseasonable hour, cameshambling along from his galley, for, like many old blacks, there wassomething the matter with his knee-pans, which he did not keep wellscoured like his other pans; this old Fleece, as they called him,came shuffling and limping along, assisting his step with his tongs,which, after a clumsy fashion, were made of straightened iron hoops;this old Ebony floundered along, and in obedience to the word ofcommand, came to a dead stop on the opposite side of Stubb'ssideboard; when, with both hands folded before him, and resting onhis two-legged cane, he bowed his arched back still further over, atthe same time sideways inclining his head, so as to bring his bestear into play.
"Cook," said Stubb, rapidly lifting a rather reddish morsel to hismouth, "don't you think this steak is rather overdone? You've beenbeating this steak too much, cook; it's too tender.
Don't I alwayssay that to be good, a whale-steak must be tough? There are thosesharks now over the side, don't you see they prefer it tough andrare? What a shindy they are kicking up! Cook, go and talk to 'em;tell 'em they are welcome to help themselves civilly, and inmoderation, but they must keep quiet.
Blast me, if I can hear my ownvoice.
Away, cook, and deliver my message.
Here, take thislantern," snatching one from his sideboard; "now then, go and preachto 'em!"Sullenly taking the offered lantern, old Fleece limped across thedeck to the bulwarks; and then, with one hand dropping his light lowover the sea, so as to get a good view of his congregation, with theother hand he solemnly flourished his tongs, and leaning far over theside in a mumbling voice began addressing the sharks, while Stubb,softly crawling behind, overheard all that was said.
"Fellow-critters: I'se ordered here to say dat you must stop dat damnoise dare.
You hear? Stop dat dam smackin' ob de lips! MassaStubb say dat you can fill your dam bellies up to de hatchings, butby Gor! you must stop dat dam racket!""Cook," here interposed Stubb, accompanying the word with a suddenslap on the shoulder,--"Cook! why, damn your eyes, you mustn't swearthat way when you're preaching.
That's no way to convert sinners,cook!""Who dat? Den preach to him yourself," sullenly turning to go.
"No, cook; go on, go on.
""Well, den, Belubed fellow-critters:"-"Right!" exclaimed Stubb, approvingly, "coax 'em to it; try that,"and Fleece continued.
"Do you is all sharks, and by natur wery woracious, yet I zay to you,fellow-critters, dat dat woraciousness--'top dat dam slappin' ob detail! How you tink to hear, spose you keep up such a dam slappin'and bitin' dare?""Cook," cried Stubb, collaring him, "I won't have that swearing.
Talk to 'em gentlemanly.
"Once more the sermon proceeded.
"Your woraciousness, fellow-critters, I don't blame ye so much for;dat is natur, and can't be helped; but to gobern dat wicked natur,dat is de pint.
You is sharks, sartin; but if you gobern de shark inyou, why den you be angel; for all angel is not'ing more dan de sharkwell goberned.
Now, look here, bred'ren, just try wonst to be cibil,a helping yourselbs from dat whale.
Don't be tearin' de blubber outyour neighbour's mout, I say.
Is not one shark dood right as toderto dat whale? And, by Gor, none on you has de right to dat whale;dat whale belong to some one else.
I know some o' you has berry brigmout, brigger dan oders; but den de brig mouts sometimes has desmall bellies; so dat de brigness of de mout is not to swaller wid,but to bit off de blubber for de small fry ob sharks, dat can't getinto de scrouge to help demselves.
""Well done, old Fleece!" cried Stubb, "that's Christianity; go on.
""No use goin' on; de dam willains will keep a scougin' and slappin'each oder, Massa Stubb; dey don't hear one word; no use a-preachingto such dam g'uttons as you call 'em, till dare bellies is full, anddare bellies is bottomless; and when dey do get 'em full, dey wonthear you den; for den dey sink in the sea, go fast to sleep on decoral, and can't hear noting at all, no more, for eber and eber.
""Upon my soul, I am about of the same opinion; so give thebenediction, Fleece, and I'll away to my supper.
"Upon this, Fleece, holding both hands over the fishy mob, raised hisshrill voice, and cried--"Cussed fellow-critters! Kick up de damndest row as ever you can;fill your dam bellies 'till dey bust--and den die.
""Now, cook," said Stubb, resuming his supper at the capstan; "standjust where you stood before, there, over against me, and payparticular attention.
""All 'dention," said Fleece, again stooping over upon his tongs inthe desired position.
"Well," said Stubb, helping himself freely meanwhile; "I shall now goback to the subject of this steak.
In the first place, how old areyou, cook?""What dat do wid de 'teak," said the old black, testily.
"Silence! How old are you, cook?""'Bout ninety, dey say," he gloomily muttered.
"And you have lived in this world hard upon one hundred years, cook,and don't know yet how to cook a whale-steak?" rapidly boltinganother mouthful at the last word, so that morsel seemed acontinuation of the question.
"Where were you born, cook?""'Hind de hatchway, in ferry-boat, goin' ober de Roanoke.
""Born in a ferry-boat! That's queer, too.
But I want to know whatcountry you were born in, cook!""Didn't I say de Roanoke country?" he cried sharply.
"No, you didn't, cook; but I'll tell you what I'm coming to, cook.
You must go home and be born over again; you don't know how to cook awhale-steak yet.
""Bress my soul, if I cook noder one," he growled, angrily, turninground to depart.
"Come back here, cook;--here, hand me those tongs;--now take that bitof steak there, and tell me if you think that steak cooked as itshould be? Take it, I say"--holding the tongs towards him--"take it,and taste it.
"Faintly smacking his withered lips over it for a moment, the oldnegro muttered, "Best cooked 'teak I eber taste; joosy, berry joosy.
""Cook," said Stubb, squaring himself once more; "do you belong to thechurch?""Passed one once in Cape-Down," said the old man sullenly.
"And you have once in your life passed a holy church in Cape-Town,where you doubtless overheard a holy parson addressing his hearers ashis beloved fellow-creatures, have you, cook! And yet you come here,and tell me such a dreadful lie as you did just now, eh?" said Stubb.
"Where do you expect to go to, cook?""Go to bed berry soon," he mumbled, half-turning as he spoke.
"Avast! heave to! I mean when you die, cook.
It's an awfulquestion.
Now what's your answer?""When dis old brack man dies," said the negro slowly, changing hiswhole air and demeanor, "he hisself won't go nowhere; but somebressed angel will come and fetch him.
""Fetch him? How? In a coach and four, as they fetched Elijah? Andfetch him where?""Up dere," said Fleece, holding his tongs straight over his head, andkeeping it there very solemnly.
"So, then, you expect to go up into our main-top, do you, cook, whenyou are dead? But don't you know the higher you climb, the colder itgets? Main-top, eh?""Didn't say dat t'all," said Fleece, again in the sulks.
"You said up there, didn't you? and now look yourself, and see whereyour tongs are pointing.
But, perhaps you expect to get into heavenby crawling through the lubber's hole, cook; but, no, no, cook, youdon't get there, except you go the regular way, round by the rigging.
It's a ticklish business, but must be done, or else it's no go.
Butnone of us are in heaven yet.
Drop your tongs, cook, and hear myorders.
Do ye hear? Hold your hat in one hand, and clap t'othera'top of your heart, when I'm giving my orders, cook.
What! thatyour heart, there?--that's your gizzard! Aloft! aloft!--that'sit--now you have it.
Hold it there now, and pay attention.
""All 'dention," said the old black, with both hands placed asdesired, vainly wriggling his grizzled head, as if to get both earsin front at one and the same time.
"Well then, cook, you see this whale-steak of yours was so very bad,that I have put it out of sight as soon as possible; you see that,don't you? Well, for the future, when you cook another whale-steakfor my private table here, the capstan, I'll tell you what to do soas not to spoil it by overdoing.
Hold the steak in one hand, andshow a live coal to it with the other; that done, dish it; d'ye hear?And now to-morrow, cook, when we are cutting in the fish, be sureyou stand by to get the tips of his fins; have them put in pickle.
As for the ends of the flukes, have them soused, cook.
There, now yemay go.
"But Fleece had hardly got three paces off, when he was recalled.
"Cook, give me cutlets for supper to-morrow night in the mid-watch.
D'ye hear? away you sail, then.
--Halloa! stop! make a bow before yougo.
--Avast heaving again! Whale-balls for breakfast--don't forget.
""Wish, by gor! whale eat him, 'stead of him eat whale.
I'm bressedif he ain't more of shark dan Massa Shark hisself," muttered the oldman, limping away; with which sage ejaculation he went to hishammock.
The Whale as a Dish.
That mortal man should feed upon the creature that feeds his lamp,and, like Stubb, eat him by his own light, as you may say; this seemsso outlandish a thing that one must needs go a little into thehistory and philosophy of it.
It is upon record, that three centuries ago the tongue of the RightWhale was esteemed a great delicacy in France, and commanded largeprices there.
Also, that in Henry VIIIth's time, a certain cook ofthe court obtained a handsome reward for inventing an admirable sauceto be eaten with barbacued porpoises, which, you remember, are aspecies of whale.
Porpoises, indeed, are to this day considered fineeating.
The meat is made into balls about the size of billiardballs, and being well seasoned and spiced might be taken forturtle-balls or veal balls.
The old monks of Dunfermline were veryfond of them.
They had a great porpoise grant from the crown.
The fact is, that among his hunters at least, the whale would by allhands be considered a noble dish, were there not so much of him; butwhen you come to sit down before a meat-pie nearly one hundred feetlong, it takes away your appetite.
Only the most unprejudiced of menlike Stubb, nowadays partake of cooked whales; but the Esquimaux arenot so fastidious.
We all know how they live upon whales, and haverare old vintages of prime old train oil.
Zogranda, one of theirmost famous doctors, recommends strips of blubber for infants, asbeing exceedingly juicy and nourishing.
And this reminds me thatcertain Englishmen, who long ago were accidentally left in Greenlandby a whaling vessel--that these men actually lived for several monthson the mouldy scraps of whales which had been left ashore aftertrying out the blubber.
Among the Dutch whalemen these scraps arecalled "fritters"; which, indeed, they greatly resemble, being brownand crisp, and smelling something like old Amsterdam housewives'dough-nuts or oly-cooks, when fresh.
They have such an eatable lookthat the most self-denying stranger can hardly keep his hands off.
But what further depreciates the whale as a civilized dish, is hisexceeding richness.
He is the great prize ox of the sea, too fat tobe delicately good.
Look at his hump, which would be as fine eatingas the buffalo's (which is esteemed a rare dish), were it not such asolid pyramid of fat.
But the spermaceti itself, how bland andcreamy that is; like the transparent, half-jellied, white meat of acocoanut in the third month of its growth, yet far too rich to supplya substitute for butter.
Nevertheless, many whalemen have a methodof absorbing it into some other substance, and then partaking of it.
In the long try watches of the night it is a common thing for theseamen to dip their ship-biscuit into the huge oil-pots and let themfry there awhile.
Many a good supper have I thus made.
In the case of a small Sperm Whale the brains are accounted a finedish.
The casket of the skull is broken into with an axe, and thetwo plump, whitish lobes being withdrawn (precisely resembling twolarge puddings), they are then mixed with flour, and cooked into amost delectable mess, in flavor somewhat resembling calves' head,which is quite a dish among some epicures; and every one knows thatsome young bucks among the epicures, by continually dining uponcalves' brains, by and by get to have a little brains of their own,so as to be able to tell a calf's head from their own heads; which,indeed, requires uncommon discrimination.
And that is the reason whya young buck with an intelligent looking calf's head before him, issomehow one of the saddest sights you can see.
The head looks a sortof reproachfully at him, with an "Et tu Brute!" expression.
It is not, perhaps, entirely because the whale is so excessivelyunctuous that landsmen seem to regard the eating of him withabhorrence; that appears to result, in some way, from theconsideration before mentioned: i.
e.
that a man should eat a newlymurdered thing of the sea, and eat it too by its own light.
But nodoubt the first man that ever murdered an ox was regarded as amurderer; perhaps he was hung; and if he had been put on his trial byoxen, he certainly would have been; and he certainly deserved it ifany murderer does.
Go to the meat-market of a Saturday night and seethe crowds of live bipeds staring up at the long rows of deadquadrupeds.
Does not that sight take a tooth out of the cannibal'sjaw? Cannibals? who is not a cannibal? I tell you it will be moretolerable for the Fejee that salted down a lean missionary in hiscellar against a coming famine; it will be more tolerable for thatprovident Fejee, I say, in the day of judgment, than for thee,civilized and enlightened gourmand, who nailest geese to the groundand feastest on their bloated livers in thy pate-de-foie-gras.
But Stubb, he eats the whale by its own light, does he? and that isadding insult to injury, is it? Look at your knife-handle, there, mycivilized and enlightened gourmand dining off that roast beef, whatis that handle made of?--what but the bones of the brother of thevery ox you are eating? And what do you pick your teeth with, afterdevouring that fat goose? With a feather of the same fowl.
And withwhat quill did the Secretary of the Society for the Suppression ofCruelty to Ganders formally indite his circulars? It is only withinthe last month or two that that society passed a resolution topatronise nothing but steel pens.
The Shark Massacre.
When in the Southern Fishery, a captured Sperm Whale, after long andweary toil, is brought alongside late at night, it is not, as ageneral thing at least, customary to proceed at once to the businessof cutting him in.
For that business is an exceedingly laboriousone; is not very soon completed; and requires all hands to set aboutit.
Therefore, the common usage is to take in all sail; lash thehelm a'lee; and then send every one below to his hammock tilldaylight, with the reservation that, until that time, anchor-watchesshall be kept; that is, two and two for an hour, each couple, thecrew in rotation shall mount the deck to see that all goes well.
But sometimes, especially upon the Line in the Pacific, this planwill not answer at all; because such incalculable hosts of sharksgather round the moored carcase, that were he left so for six hours,say, on a stretch, little more than the skeleton would be visible bymorning.
In most other parts of the ocean, however, where these fishdo not so largely abound, their wondrous voracity can be at timesconsiderably diminished, by vigorously stirring them up with sharpwhaling-spades, a procedure notwithstanding, which, in someinstances, only seems to tickle them into still greater activity.
But it was not thus in the present case with the Pequod's sharks;though, to be sure, any man unaccustomed to such sights, to havelooked over her side that night, would have almost thought the wholeround sea was one huge cheese, and those sharks the maggots in it.
Nevertheless, upon Stubb setting the anchor-watch after his supperwas concluded; and when, accordingly, Queequeg and a forecastleseaman came on deck, no small excitement was created among thesharks; for immediately suspending the cutting stages over the side,and lowering three lanterns, so that they cast long gleams of lightover the turbid sea, these two mariners, darting their longwhaling-spades, kept up an incessant murdering of the sharks,* bystriking the keen steel deep into their skulls, seemingly their onlyvital part.
But in the foamy confusion of their mixed and strugglinghosts, the marksmen could not always hit their mark; and this broughtabout new revelations of the incredible ferocity of the foe.
Theyviciously snapped, not only at each other's disembowelments, but likeflexible bows, bent round, and bit their own; till those entrailsseemed swallowed over and over again by the same mouth, to beoppositely voided by the gaping wound.
Nor was this all.
It wasunsafe to meddle with the corpses and ghosts of these creatures.
Asort of generic or Pantheistic vitality seemed to lurk in their veryjoints and bones, after what might be called the individual life haddeparted.
Killed and hoisted on deck for the sake of his skin, oneof these sharks almost took poor Queequeg's hand off, when he triedto shut down the dead lid of his murderous jaw.
*The whaling-spade used for cutting-in is made of the very beststeel; is about the bigness of a man's spread hand; and in generalshape, corresponds to the garden implement after which it is named;only its sides are perfectly flat, and its upper end considerablynarrower than the lower.
This weapon is always kept as sharp aspossible; and when being used is occasionally honed, just like arazor.
In its socket, a stiff pole, from twenty to thirty feet long,is inserted for a handle.
"Queequeg no care what god made him shark," said the savage,agonizingly lifting his hand up and down; "wedder Fejee god orNantucket god; but de god wat made shark must be one dam Ingin.
"Cutting In.
It was a Saturday night, and such a Sabbath as followed! Ex officioprofessors of Sabbath breaking are all whalemen.
The ivory Pequodwas turned into what seemed a shamble; every sailor a butcher.
Youwould have thought we were offering up ten thousand red oxen to thesea gods.
In the first place, the enormous cutting tackles, among otherponderous things comprising a cluster of blocks generally paintedgreen, and which no single man can possibly lift--this vast bunch ofgrapes was swayed up to the main-top and firmly lashed to the lowermast-head, the strongest point anywhere above a ship's deck.
The endof the hawser-like rope winding through these intricacies, was thenconducted to the windlass, and the huge lower block of the tackleswas swung over the whale; to this block the great blubber hook,weighing some one hundred pounds, was attached.
And now suspended instages over the side, Starbuck and Stubb, the mates, armed with theirlong spades, began cutting a hole in the body for the insertion ofthe hook just above the nearest of the two side-fins.
This done, abroad, semicircular line is cut round the hole, the hook is inserted,and the main body of the crew striking up a wild chorus, now commenceheaving in one dense crowd at the windlass.
When instantly, theentire ship careens over on her side; every bolt in her starts likethe nail-heads of an old house in frosty weather; she trembles,quivers, and nods her frighted mast-heads to the sky.
More and moreshe leans over to the whale, while every gasping heave of thewindlass is answered by a helping heave from the billows; till atlast, a swift, startling snap is heard; with a great swash the shiprolls upwards and backwards from the whale, and the triumphant tacklerises into sight dragging after it the disengaged semicircular end ofthe first strip of blubber.
Now as the blubber envelopes the whaleprecisely as the rind does an orange, so is it stripped off from thebody precisely as an orange is sometimes stripped by spiralizing it.
For the strain constantly kept up by the windlass continually keepsthe whale rolling over and over in the water, and as the blubber inone strip uniformly peels off along the line called the "scarf,"simultaneously cut by the spades of Starbuck and Stubb, the mates;and just as fast as it is thus peeled off, and indeed by that veryact itself, it is all the time being hoisted higher and higher alofttill its upper end grazes the main-top; the men at the windlass thencease heaving, and for a moment or two the prodigious blood-drippingmass sways to and fro as if let down from the sky, and every onepresent must take good heed to dodge it when it swings, else it maybox his ears and pitch him headlong overboard.
One of the attending harpooneers now advances with a long, keenweapon called a boarding-sword, and watching his chance hedexterously slices out a considerable hole in the lower part of theswaying mass.
Into this hole, the end of the second alternatinggreat tackle is then hooked so as to retain a hold upon the blubber,in order to prepare for what follows.
Whereupon, this accomplishedswordsman, warning all hands to stand off, once more makes ascientific dash at the mass, and with a few sidelong, desperate,lunging slicings, severs it completely in twain; so that while theshort lower part is still fast, the long upper strip, called ablanket-piece, swings clear, and is all ready for lowering.
Theheavers forward now resume their song, and while the one tackle ispeeling and hoisting a second strip from the whale, the other isslowly slackened away, and down goes the first strip through the mainhatchway right beneath, into an unfurnished parlor called theblubber-room.
Into this twilight apartment sundry nimble hands keepcoiling away the long blanket-piece as if it were a great live massof plaited serpents.
And thus the work proceeds; the two tackleshoisting and lowering simultaneously; both whale and windlassheaving, the heavers singing, the blubber-room gentlemen coiling, themates scarfing, the ship straining, and all hands swearingoccasionally, by way of assuaging the general friction.
The Blanket.
I have given no small attention to that not unvexed subject, the skinof the whale.
I have had controversies about it with experiencedwhalemen afloat, and learned naturalists ashore.
My original opinionremains unchanged; but it is only an opinion.
The question is, what and where is the skin of the whale? Alreadyyou know what his blubber is.
That blubber is something of theconsistence of firm, close-grained beef, but tougher, more elasticand compact, and ranges from eight or ten to twelve and fifteeninches in thickness.
Now, however preposterous it may at first seem to talk of anycreature's skin as being of that sort of consistence and thickness,yet in point of fact these are no arguments against such apresumption; because you cannot raise any other dense envelopinglayer from the whale's body but that same blubber; and the outermostenveloping layer of any animal, if reasonably dense, what can that bebut the skin? True, from the unmarred dead body of the whale, youmay scrape off with your hand an infinitely thin, transparentsubstance, somewhat resembling the thinnest shreds of isinglass, onlyit is almost as flexible and soft as satin; that is, previous tobeing dried, when it not only contracts and thickens, but becomesrather hard and brittle.
I have several such dried bits, which I usefor marks in my whale-books.
It is transparent, as I said before;and being laid upon the printed page, I have sometimes pleased myselfwith fancying it exerted a magnifying influence.
At any rate, it ispleasant to read about whales through their own spectacles, as youmay say.
But what I am driving at here is this.
That sameinfinitely thin, isinglass substance, which, I admit, invests theentire body of the whale, is not so much to be regarded as the skinof the creature, as the skin of the skin, so to speak; for it weresimply ridiculous to say, that the proper skin of the tremendouswhale is thinner and more tender than the skin of a new-born child.
But no more of this.
Assuming the blubber to be the skin of the whale; then, when thisskin, as in the case of a very large Sperm Whale, will yield the bulkof one hundred barrels of oil; and, when it is considered that, inquantity, or rather weight, that oil, in its expressed state, is onlythree fourths, and not the entire substance of the coat; some ideamay hence be had of the enormousness of that animated mass, a merepart of whose mere integument yields such a lake of liquid as that.
Reckoning ten barrels to the ton, you have ten tons for the netweight of only three quarters of the stuff of the whale's skin.
In life, the visible surface of the Sperm Whale is not the leastamong the many marvels he presents.
Almost invariably it is all overobliquely crossed and re-crossed with numberless straight marks inthick array, something like those in the finest Italian lineengravings.
But these marks do not seem to be impressed upon theisinglass substance above mentioned, but seem to be seen through it,as if they were engraved upon the body itself.
Nor is this all.
Insome instances, to the quick, observant eye, those linear marks, asin a veritable engraving, but afford the ground for far otherdelineations.
These are hieroglyphical; that is, if you call thosemysterious cyphers on the walls of pyramids hieroglyphics, then thatis the proper word to use in the present connexion.
By my retentivememory of the hieroglyphics upon one Sperm Whale in particular, I wasmuch struck with a plate representing the old Indian characterschiselled on the famous hieroglyphic palisades on the banks of theUpper Mississippi.
Like those mystic rocks, too, the mystic-markedwhale remains undecipherable.
This allusion to the Indian rocksreminds me of another thing.
Besides all the other phenomena whichthe exterior of the Sperm Whale presents, he not seldom displays theback, and more especially his flanks, effaced in great part of theregular linear appearance, by reason of numerous rude scratches,altogether of an irregular, random aspect.
I should say that thoseNew England rocks on the sea-coast, which Agassiz imagines to bearthe marks of violent scraping contact with vast floating icebergs--Ishould say, that those rocks must not a little resemble the SpermWhale in this particular.
It also seems to me that such scratches inthe whale are probably made by hostile contact with other whales; forI have most remarked them in the large, full-grown bulls of thespecies.
A word or two more concerning this matter of the skin or blubber ofthe whale.
It has already been said, that it is stript from him inlong pieces, called blanket-pieces.
Like most sea-terms, this one isvery happy and significant.
For the whale is indeed wrapt up in hisblubber as in a real blanket or counterpane; or, still better, anIndian poncho slipt over his head, and skirting his extremity.
It isby reason of this cosy blanketing of his body, that the whale isenabled to keep himself comfortable in all weathers, in all seas,times, and tides.
What would become of a Greenland whale, say, inthose shuddering, icy seas of the North, if unsupplied with his cosysurtout? True, other fish are found exceedingly brisk in thoseHyperborean waters; but these, be it observed, are your cold-blooded,lungless fish, whose very bellies are refrigerators; creatures, thatwarm themselves under the lee of an iceberg, as a traveller in winterwould bask before an inn fire; whereas, like man, the whale has lungsand warm blood.
Freeze his blood, and he dies.
How wonderful is itthen--except after explanation--that this great monster, to whomcorporeal warmth is as indispensable as it is to man; how wonderfulthat he should be found at home, immersed to his lips for life inthose Arctic waters! where, when seamen fall overboard, they aresometimes found, months afterwards, perpendicularly frozen into thehearts of fields of ice, as a fly is found glued in amber.
But moresurprising is it to know, as has been proved by experiment, that theblood of a Polar whale is warmer than that of a Borneo negro insummer.
It does seem to me, that herein we see the rare virtue of a strongindividual vitality, and the rare virtue of thick walls, and the rarevirtue of interior spaciousness.
Oh, man! admire and model thyselfafter the whale! Do thou, too, remain warm among ice.
Do thou, too,live in this world without being of it.
Be cool at the equator; keepthy blood fluid at the Pole.
Like the great dome of St.
Peter's, andlike the great whale, retain, O man! in all seasons a temperature ofthine own.
But how easy and how hopeless to teach these fine things! Oferections, how few are domed like St.
Peter's! of creatures, how fewvast as the whale!The Funeral.
Haul in the chains! Let the carcase go astern!The vast tackles have now done their duty.
The peeled white body ofthe beheaded whale flashes like a marble sepulchre; though changed inhue, it has not perceptibly lost anything in bulk.
It is stillcolossal.
Slowly it floats more and more away, the water round ittorn and splashed by the insatiate sharks, and the air above vexedwith rapacious flights of screaming fowls, whose beaks are like somany insulting poniards in the whale.
The vast white headlessphantom floats further and further from the ship, and every rod thatit so floats, what seem square roods of sharks and cubic roods offowls, augment the murderous din.
For hours and hours from thealmost stationary ship that hideous sight is seen.
Beneath theunclouded and mild azure sky, upon the fair face of the pleasant sea,wafted by the joyous breezes, that great mass of death floats on andon, till lost in infinite perspectives.
There's a most doleful and most mocking funeral! The sea-vulturesall in pious mourning, the air-sharks all punctiliously in black orspeckled.
In life but few of them would have helped the whale, Iween, if peradventure he had needed it; but upon the banquet of hisfuneral they most piously do pounce.
Oh, horrible vultureism ofearth! from which not the mightiest whale is free.
Nor is this the end.
Desecrated as the body is, a vengeful ghostsurvives and hovers over it to scare.
Espied by some timidman-of-war or blundering discovery-vessel from afar, when thedistance obscuring the swarming fowls, nevertheless still shows thewhite mass floating in the sun, and the white spray heaving highagainst it; straightway the whale's unharming corpse, with tremblingfingers is set down in the log--SHOALS, ROCKS, AND BREAKERSHEREABOUTS: BEWARE! And for years afterwards, perhaps, ships shunthe place; leaping over it as silly sheep leap over a vacuum, becausetheir leader originally leaped there when a stick was held.
There'syour law of precedents; there's your utility of traditions; there'sthe story of your obstinate survival of old beliefs never bottomed onthe earth, and now not even hovering in the air! There's orthodoxy!Thus, while in life the great whale's body may have been a realterror to his foes, in his death his ghost becomes a powerless panicto a world.
Are you a believer in ghosts, my friend? There are other ghosts thanthe Cock-Lane one, and far deeper men than Doctor Johnson who believein them.
The Sphynx.
It should not have been omitted that previous to completely strippingthe body of the leviathan, he was beheaded.
Now, the beheading ofthe Sperm Whale is a scientific anatomical feat, upon whichexperienced whale surgeons very much pride themselves: and notwithout reason.
Consider that the whale has nothing that can properly be called aneck; on the contrary, where his head and body seem to join, there,in that very place, is the thickest part of him.
Remember, also,that the surgeon must operate from above, some eight or ten feetintervening between him and his subject, and that subject almosthidden in a discoloured, rolling, and oftentimes tumultuous andbursting sea.
Bear in mind, too, that under these untowardcircumstances he has to cut many feet deep in the flesh; and in thatsubterraneous manner, without so much as getting one single peep intothe ever-contracting gash thus made, he must skilfully steer clearof all adjacent, interdicted parts, and exactly divide the spine at acritical point hard by its insertion into the skull.
Do you notmarvel, then, at Stubb's boast, that he demanded but ten minutes tobehead a sperm whale?When first severed, the head is dropped astern and held there by acable till the body is stripped.
That done, if it belong to a smallwhale it is hoisted on deck to be deliberately disposed of.
But,with a full grown leviathan this is impossible; for the sperm whale'shead embraces nearly one third of his entire bulk, and completely tosuspend such a burden as that, even by the immense tackles of awhaler, this were as vain a thing as to attempt weighing a Dutch barnin jewellers' scales.
The Pequod's whale being decapitated and the body stripped, the headwas hoisted against the ship's side--about half way out of the sea,so that it might yet in great part be buoyed up by its nativeelement.
And there with the strained craft steeply leaning over to it,by reason of the enormous downward drag from the lower mast-head, andevery yard-arm on that side projecting like a crane over the waves;there, that blood-dripping head hung to the Pequod's waist like thegiant Holofernes's from the girdle of Judith.
When this last task was accomplished it was noon, and the seamen wentbelow to their dinner.
Silence reigned over the before tumultuousbut now deserted deck.
An intense copper calm, like a universalyellow lotus, was more and more unfolding its noiseless measurelessleaves upon the sea.
A short space elapsed, and up into this noiselessness came Ahab alonefrom his cabin.
Taking a few turns on the quarter-deck, he paused togaze over the side, then slowly getting into the main-chains he tookStubb's long spade--still remaining there after the whale'sDecapitation--and striking it into the lower part of thehalf-suspended mass, placed its other end crutch-wise under one arm,and so stood leaning over with eyes attentively fixed on this head.
It was a black and hooded head; and hanging there in the midst of sointense a calm, it seemed the Sphynx's in the desert.
"Speak, thouvast and venerable head," muttered Ahab, "which, though ungarnishedwith a beard, yet here and there lookest hoary with mosses; speak,mighty head, and tell us the secret thing that is in thee.
Of alldivers, thou hast dived the deepest.
That head upon which the uppersun now gleams, has moved amid this world's foundations.
Whereunrecorded names and navies rust, and untold hopes and anchors rot;where in her murderous hold this frigate earth is ballasted withbones of millions of the drowned; there, in that awful water-land,there was thy most familiar home.
Thou hast been where bell or divernever went; hast slept by many a sailor's side, where sleeplessmothers would give their lives to lay them down.
Thou saw'st thelocked lovers when leaping from their flaming ship; heart to heartthey sank beneath the exulting wave; true to each other, when heavenseemed false to them.
Thou saw'st the murdered mate when tossed bypirates from the midnight deck; for hours he fell into the deepermidnight of the insatiate maw; and his murderers still sailed onunharmed--while swift lightnings shivered the neighboring ship thatwould have borne a righteous husband to outstretched, longing arms.
O head! thou hast seen enough to split the planets and make aninfidel of Abraham, and not one syllable is thine!""Sail ho!" cried a triumphant voice from the main-mast-head.
"Aye? Well, now, that's cheering," cried Ahab, suddenly erectinghimself, while whole thunder-clouds swept aside from his brow.
"Thatlively cry upon this deadly calm might almost convert a betterman.
--Where away?""Three points on the starboard bow, sir, and bringing down her breezeto us!"Better and better, man.
Would now St.
Paul would come along thatway, and to my breezelessness bring his breeze! O Nature, and O soulof man! how far beyond all utterance are your linked analogies! notthe smallest atom stirs or lives on matter, but has its cunningduplicate in mind.
"The Jeroboam's Story.
Hand in hand, ship and breeze blew on; but the breeze came fasterthan the ship, and soon the Pequod began to rock.
By and by, through the glass the stranger's boats and mannedmast-heads proved her a whale-ship.
But as she was so far towindward, and shooting by, apparently making a passage to some otherground, the Pequod could not hope to reach her.
So the signal wasset to see what response would be made.
Here be it said, that like the vessels of military marines, the shipsof the American Whale Fleet have each a private signal; all whichsignals being collected in a book with the names of the respectivevessels attached, every captain is provided with it.
Thereby, thewhale commanders are enabled to recognise each other upon the ocean,even at considerable distances and with no small facility.
The Pequod's signal was at last responded to by the stranger'ssetting her own; which proved the ship to be the Jeroboam ofNantucket.
Squaring her yards, she bore down, ranged abeam under thePequod's lee, and lowered a boat; it soon drew nigh; but, as theside-ladder was being rigged by Starbuck's order to accommodate thevisiting captain, the stranger in question waved his hand from hisboat's stern in token of that proceeding being entirely unnecessary.
It turned out that the Jeroboam had a malignant epidemic on board,and that Mayhew, her captain, was fearful of infecting the Pequod'scompany.
For, though himself and boat's crew remained untainted, andthough his ship was half a rifle-shot off, and an incorruptible seaand air rolling and flowing between; yet conscientiously adhering tothe timid quarantine of the land, he peremptorily refused to comeinto direct contact with the Pequod.
But this did by no means prevent all communications.
Preserving aninterval of some few yards between itself and the ship, theJeroboam's boat by the occasional use of its oars contrived to keepparallel to the Pequod, as she heavily forged through the sea (for bythis time it blew very fresh), with her main-topsail aback; though,indeed, at times by the sudden onset of a large rolling wave, theboat would be pushed some way ahead; but would be soon skilfullybrought to her proper bearings again.
Subject to this, and other thelike interruptions now and then, a conversation was sustained betweenthe two parties; but at intervals not without still anotherinterruption of a very different sort.
Pulling an oar in the Jeroboam's boat, was a man of a singularappearance, even in that wild whaling life where individualnotabilities make up all totalities.
He was a small, short, youngishman, sprinkled all over his face with freckles, and wearing redundantyellow hair.
A long-skirted, cabalistically-cut coat of a fadedwalnut tinge enveloped him; the overlapping sleeves of which wererolled up on his wrists.
A deep, settled, fanatic delirium was inhis eyes.
So soon as this figure had been first descried, Stubb hadexclaimed--"That's he! that's he!--the long-togged scaramouch theTown-Ho's company told us of!" Stubb here alluded to a strange storytold of the Jeroboam, and a certain man among her crew, some timeprevious when the Pequod spoke the Town-Ho.
According to thisaccount and what was subsequently learned, it seemed that thescaramouch in question had gained a wonderful ascendency over almosteverybody in the Jeroboam.
His story was this:He had been originally nurtured among the crazy society of NeskyeunaShakers, where he had been a great prophet; in their cracked, secretmeetings having several times descended from heaven by the way of atrap-door, announcing the speedy opening of the seventh vial, whichhe carried in his vest-pocket; but, which, instead of containinggunpowder, was supposed to be charged with laudanum.
A strange,apostolic whim having seized him, he had left Neskyeuna forNantucket, where, with that cunning peculiar to craziness, he assumeda steady, common-sense exterior, and offered himself as a green-handcandidate for the Jeroboam's whaling voyage.
They engaged him; butstraightway upon the ship's getting out of sight of land, hisinsanity broke out in a freshet.
He announced himself as thearchangel Gabriel, and commanded the captain to jump overboard.
Hepublished his manifesto, whereby he set himself forth as thedeliverer of the isles of the sea and vicar-general of all Oceanica.
The unflinching earnestness with which he declared these things;--thedark, daring play of his sleepless, excited imagination, and all thepreternatural terrors of real delirium, united to invest this Gabrielin the minds of the majority of the ignorant crew, with an atmosphereof sacredness.
Moreover, they were afraid of him.
As such a man,however, was not of much practical use in the ship, especially as herefused to work except when he pleased, the incredulous captain wouldfain have been rid of him; but apprised that that individual'sintention was to land him in the first convenient port, the archangelforthwith opened all his seals and vials--devoting the ship and allhands to unconditional perdition, in case this intention was carriedout.
So strongly did he work upon his disciples among the crew, thatat last in a body they went to the captain and told him if Gabrielwas sent from the ship, not a man of them would remain.
He wastherefore forced to relinquish his plan.
Nor would they permitGabriel to be any way maltreated, say or do what he would; so that itcame to pass that Gabriel had the complete freedom of the ship.
Theconsequence of all this was, that the archangel cared little ornothing for the captain and mates; and since the epidemic had brokenout, he carried a higher hand than ever; declaring that the plague,as he called it, was at his sole command; nor should it be stayed butaccording to his good pleasure.
The sailors, mostly poor devils,cringed, and some of them fawned before him; in obedience to hisinstructions, sometimes rendering him personal homage, as to a god.
Such things may seem incredible; but, however wondrous, they aretrue.
Nor is the history of fanatics half so striking in respect tothe measureless self-deception of the fanatic himself, as hismeasureless power of deceiving and bedevilling so many others.
Butit is time to return to the Pequod.
"I fear not thy epidemic, man," said Ahab from the bulwarks, toCaptain Mayhew, who stood in the boat's stern; "come on board.
"But now Gabriel started to his feet.
"Think, think of the fevers, yellow and bilious! Beware of thehorrible plague!""Gabriel! Gabriel!" cried Captain Mayhew; "thou must either--" Butthat instant a headlong wave shot the boat far ahead, and itsseethings drowned all speech.
"Hast thou seen the White Whale?" demanded Ahab, when the boatdrifted back.
"Think, think of thy whale-boat, stoven and sunk! Beware of thehorrible tail!""I tell thee again, Gabriel, that--" But again the boat tore aheadas if dragged by fiends.
Nothing was said for some moments, while asuccession of riotous waves rolled by, which by one of thoseoccasional caprices of the seas were tumbling, not heaving it.
Meantime, the hoisted sperm whale's head jogged about very violently,and Gabriel was seen eyeing it with rather more apprehensiveness thanhis archangel nature seemed to warrant.
When this interlude was over, Captain Mayhew began a dark storyconcerning Moby Dick; not, however, without frequent interruptionsfrom Gabriel, whenever his name was mentioned, and the crazy sea thatseemed leagued with him.
It seemed that the Jeroboam had not long left home, when uponspeaking a whale-ship, her people were reliably apprised of theexistence of Moby Dick, and the havoc he had made.
Greedily suckingin this intelligence, Gabriel solemnly warned the captain againstattacking the White Whale, in case the monster should be seen; in hisgibbering insanity, pronouncing the White Whale to be no less a beingthan the Shaker God incarnated; the Shakers receiving the Bible.
Butwhen, some year or two afterwards, Moby Dick was fairly sighted fromthe mast-heads, Macey, the chief mate, burned with ardour to encounterhim; and the captain himself being not unwilling to let him have theopportunity, despite all the archangel's denunciations andforewarnings, Macey succeeded in persuading five men to man his boat.
With them he pushed off; and, after much weary pulling, and manyperilous, unsuccessful onsets, he at last succeeded in getting oneiron fast.
Meantime, Gabriel, ascending to the main-royal mast-head,was tossing one arm in frantic gestures, and hurling forth propheciesof speedy doom to the sacrilegious assailants of his divinity.
Now,while Macey, the mate, was standing up in his boat's bow, and withall the reckless energy of his tribe was venting his wildexclamations upon the whale, and essaying to get a fair chance forhis poised lance, lo! a broad white shadow rose from the sea; by itsquick, fanning motion, temporarily taking the breath out of thebodies of the oarsmen.
Next instant, the luckless mate, so full offurious life, was smitten bodily into the air, and making a long arcin his descent, fell into the sea at the distance of about fiftyyards.
Not a chip of the boat was harmed, nor a hair of anyoarsman's head; but the mate for ever sank.
It is well to parenthesize here, that of the fatal accidents in theSperm-Whale Fishery, this kind is perhaps almost as frequent as any.
Sometimes, nothing is injured but the man who is thus annihilated;oftener the boat's bow is knocked off, or the thigh-board, in whichthe headsman stands, is torn from its place and accompanies the body.
But strangest of all is the circumstance, that in more instancesthan one, when the body has been recovered, not a single mark ofviolence is discernible; the man being stark dead.
The whole calamity, with the falling form of Macey, was plainlydescried from the ship.
Raising a piercing shriek--"The vial! thevial!" Gabriel called off the terror-stricken crew from the furtherhunting of the whale.
This terrible event clothed the archangel withadded influence; because his credulous disciples believed that he hadspecifically fore-announced it, instead of only making a generalprophecy, which any one might have done, and so have chanced to hitone of many marks in the wide margin allowed.
He became a namelessterror to the ship.
Mayhew having concluded his narration, Ahab put such questions tohim, that the stranger captain could not forbear inquiring whether heintended to hunt the White Whale, if opportunity should offer.
Towhich Ahab answered--"Aye.
" Straightway, then, Gabriel once morestarted to his feet, glaring upon the old man, and vehementlyexclaimed, with downward pointed finger--"Think, think of theblasphemer--dead, and down there!--beware of the blasphemer's end!"Ahab stolidly turned aside; then said to Mayhew, "Captain, I havejust bethought me of my letter-bag; there is a letter for one of thyofficers, if I mistake not.
Starbuck, look over the bag.
"Every whale-ship takes out a goodly number of letters for variousships, whose delivery to the persons to whom they may be addressed,depends upon the mere chance of encountering them in the four oceans.
Thus, most letters never reach their mark; and many are onlyreceived after attaining an age of two or three years or more.
Soon Starbuck returned with a letter in his hand.
It was sorelytumbled, damp, and covered with a dull, spotted, green mould, inconsequence of being kept in a dark locker of the cabin.
Of such aletter, Death himself might well have been the post-boy.
"Can'st not read it?" cried Ahab.
"Give it me, man.
Aye, aye, it'sbut a dim scrawl;--what's this?" As he was studying it out, Starbucktook a long cutting-spade pole, and with his knife slightly split theend, to insert the letter there, and in that way, hand it to theboat, without its coming any closer to the ship.
Meantime, Ahab holding the letter, muttered, "Mr.
Har--yes, Mr.
Harry--(a woman's pinny hand,--the man's wife, I'll wager)--Aye--Mr.
Harry Macey, Ship Jeroboam;--why it's Macey, and he's dead!""Poor fellow! poor fellow! and from his wife," sighed Mayhew; "butlet me have it.
""Nay, keep it thyself," cried Gabriel to Ahab; "thou art soon goingthat way.
""Curses throttle thee!" yelled Ahab.
"Captain Mayhew, stand by nowto receive it"; and taking the fatal missive from Starbuck's hands,he caught it in the slit of the pole, and reached it over towards theboat.
But as he did so, the oarsmen expectantly desisted fromrowing; the boat drifted a little towards the ship's stern; so that,as if by magic, the letter suddenly ranged along with Gabriel's eagerhand.
He clutched it in an instant, seized the boat-knife, andimpaling the letter on it, sent it thus loaded back into the ship.
It fell at Ahab's feet.
Then Gabriel shrieked out to his comrades togive way with their oars, and in that manner the mutinous boatrapidly shot away from the Pequod.
As, after this interlude, the seamen resumed their work upon thejacket of the whale, many strange things were hinted in reference tothis wild affair.
The Monkey-Rope.
In the tumultuous business of cutting-in and attending to a whale,there is much running backwards and forwards among the crew.
Nowhands are wanted here, and then again hands are wanted there.
Thereis no staying in any one place; for at one and the same timeeverything has to be done everywhere.
It is much the same with himwho endeavors the description of the scene.
We must now retrace ourway a little.
It was mentioned that upon first breaking ground inthe whale's back, the blubber-hook was inserted into the originalhole there cut by the spades of the mates.
But how did so clumsy andweighty a mass as that same hook get fixed in that hole? It wasinserted there by my particular friend Queequeg, whose duty it was,as harpooneer, to descend upon the monster's back for the specialpurpose referred to.
But in very many cases, circumstances requirethat the harpooneer shall remain on the whale till the whole tensingor stripping operation is concluded.
The whale, be it observed, liesalmost entirely submerged, excepting the immediate parts operatedupon.
So down there, some ten feet below the level of the deck, thepoor harpooneer flounders about, half on the whale and half in thewater, as the vast mass revolves like a tread-mill beneath him.
Onthe occasion in question, Queequeg figured in the Highland costume--ashirt and socks--in which to my eyes, at least, he appeared touncommon advantage; and no one had a better chance to observe him, aswill presently be seen.
Being the savage's bowsman, that is, the person who pulled thebow-oar in his boat (the second one from forward), it was my cheerfulduty to attend upon him while taking that hard-scrabble scramble uponthe dead whale's back.
You have seen Italian organ-boys holding adancing-ape by a long cord.
Just so, from the ship's steep side, didI hold Queequeg down there in the sea, by what is technically calledin the fishery a monkey-rope, attached to a strong strip of canvasbelted round his waist.
It was a humorously perilous business for both of us.
For, before weproceed further, it must be said that the monkey-rope was fast atboth ends; fast to Queequeg's broad canvas belt, and fast to mynarrow leather one.
So that for better or for worse, we two, for thetime, were wedded; and should poor Queequeg sink to rise no more,then both usage and honour demanded, that instead of cutting the cord,it should drag me down in his wake.
So, then, an elongated Siameseligature united us.
Queequeg was my own inseparable twin brother;nor could I any way get rid of the dangerous liabilities which thehempen bond entailed.
So strongly and metaphysically did I conceive of my situation then,that while earnestly watching his motions, I seemed distinctly toperceive that my own individuality was now merged in a joint stockcompany of two; that my free will had received a mortal wound; andthat another's mistake or misfortune might plunge innocent me intounmerited disaster and death.
Therefore, I saw that here was a sortof interregnum in Providence; for its even-handed equity never couldhave so gross an injustice.
And yet still further pondering--while Ijerked him now and then from between the whale and ship, which wouldthreaten to jam him--still further pondering, I say, I saw that thissituation of mine was the precise situation of every mortal thatbreathes; only, in most cases, he, one way or other, has this Siameseconnexion with a plurality of other mortals.
If your banker breaks,you snap; if your apothecary by mistake sends you poison in yourpills, you die.
True, you may say that, by exceeding caution, youmay possibly escape these and the multitudinous other evil chances oflife.
But handle Queequeg's monkey-rope heedfully as I would,sometimes he jerked it so, that I came very near sliding overboard.
Nor could I possibly forget that, do what I would, I only had themanagement of one end of it.
**The monkey-rope is found in all whalers; but it was only in thePequod that the monkey and his holder were ever tied together.
Thisimprovement upon the original usage was introduced by no less a manthan Stubb, in order to afford the imperilled harpooneer the strongestpossible guarantee for the faithfulness and vigilance of hismonkey-rope holder.
I have hinted that I would often jerk poor Queequeg from between thewhale and the ship--where he would occasionally fall, from theincessant rolling and swaying of both.
But this was not the onlyjamming jeopardy he was exposed to.
Unappalled by the massacre madeupon them during the night, the sharks now freshly and more keenlyallured by the before pent blood which began to flow from thecarcass--the rabid creatures swarmed round it like bees in a beehive.
And right in among those sharks was Queequeg; who often pushed themaside with his floundering feet.
A thing altogether incredible wereit not that attracted by such prey as a dead whale, the otherwisemiscellaneously carnivorous shark will seldom touch a man.
Nevertheless, it may well be believed that since they have such aravenous finger in the pie, it is deemed but wise to look sharp tothem.
Accordingly, besides the monkey-rope, with which I now andthen jerked the poor fellow from too close a vicinity to the maw ofwhat seemed a peculiarly ferocious shark--he was provided with stillanother protection.
Suspended over the side in one of the stages,Tashtego and Daggoo continually flourished over his head a couple ofkeen whale-spades, wherewith they slaughtered as many sharks as theycould reach.
This procedure of theirs, to be sure, was verydisinterested and benevolent of them.
They meant Queequeg's besthappiness, I admit; but in their hasty zeal to befriend him, and fromthe circumstance that both he and the sharks were at times halfhidden by the blood-muddled water, those indiscreet spades of theirswould come nearer amputating a leg than a tall.
But poor Queequeg, Isuppose, straining and gasping there with that great iron hook--poorQueequeg, I suppose, only prayed to his Yojo, and gave up his lifeinto the hands of his gods.
Well, well, my dear comrade and twin-brother, thought I, as I drew inand then slacked off the rope to every swell of the sea--what mattersit, after all? Are you not the precious image of each and all of usmen in this whaling world? That unsounded ocean you gasp in, isLife; those sharks, your foes; those spades, your friends; and whatbetween sharks and spades you are in a sad pickle and peril, poorlad.
But courage! there is good cheer in store for you, Queequeg.
Fornow, as with blue lips and blood-shot eyes the exhausted savage atlast climbs up the chains and stands all dripping and involuntarilytrembling over the side; the steward advances, and with a benevolent,consolatory glance hands him--what? Some hot Cognac? No! hands him,ye gods! hands him a cup of tepid ginger and water!"Ginger? Do I smell ginger?" suspiciously asked Stubb, coming near.
"Yes, this must be ginger," peering into the as yet untasted cup.
Then standing as if incredulous for a while, he calmly walked towardsthe astonished steward slowly saying, "Ginger? ginger? and will youhave the goodness to tell me, Mr.
Dough-Boy, where lies the virtue ofginger? Ginger! is ginger the sort of fuel you use, Dough-boy, tokindle a fire in this shivering cannibal? Ginger!--what the devil isginger?--sea-coal? firewood?--lucifermatches?--tinder?--gunpowder?--what the devil is ginger, I say, thatyou offer this cup to our poor Queequeg here.
""There is some sneaking Temperance Society movement about thisbusiness," he suddenly added, now approaching Starbuck, who had justcome from forward.
"Will you look at that kannakin, sir; smell ofit, if you please.
" Then watching the mate's countenance, he added,"The steward, Mr.
Starbuck, had the face to offer that calomel andjalap to Queequeg, there, this instant off the whale.
Is the stewardan apothecary, sir? and may I ask whether this is the sort of bittersby which he blows back the life into a half-drowned man?""I trust not," said Starbuck, "it is poor stuff enough.
""Aye, aye, steward," cried Stubb, "we'll teach you to drug itharpooneer; none of your apothecary's medicine here; you want topoison us, do ye? You have got out insurances on our lives and wantto murder us all, and pocket the proceeds, do ye?""It was not me," cried Dough-Boy, "it was Aunt Charity that broughtthe ginger on board; and bade me never give the harpooneers anyspirits, but only this ginger-jub--so she called it.
""Ginger-jub! you gingerly rascal! take that! and run along with ye tothe lockers, and get something better.
I hope I do no wrong, Mr.
Starbuck.
It is the captain's orders--grog for the harpooneer on awhale.
""Enough," replied Starbuck, "only don't hit him again, but--""Oh, I never hurt when I hit, except when I hit a whale or somethingof that sort; and this fellow's a weazel.
What were you aboutsaying, sir?""Only this: go down with him, and get what thou wantest thyself.
"When Stubb reappeared, he came with a dark flask in one hand, and asort of tea-caddy in the other.
The first contained strong spirits,and was handed to Queequeg; the second was Aunt Charity's gift, andthat was freely given to the waves.
Stubb and Flask Kill a Right Whale; and Then Have a Talk Over Him.
It must be borne in mind that all this time we have a Sperm Whale'sprodigious head hanging to the Pequod's side.
But we must let itcontinue hanging there a while till we can get a chance to attend toit.
For the present other matters press, and the best we can do nowfor the head, is to pray heaven the tackles may hold.
Now, during the past night and forenoon, the Pequod had graduallydrifted into a sea, which, by its occasional patches of yellow brit,gave unusual tokens of the vicinity of Right Whales, a species of theLeviathan that but few supposed to be at this particular time lurkinganywhere near.
And though all hands commonly disdained the captureof those inferior creatures; and though the Pequod was notcommissioned to cruise for them at all, and though she had passednumbers of them near the Crozetts without lowering a boat; yet nowthat a Sperm Whale had been brought alongside and beheaded, to thesurprise of all, the announcement was made that a Right Whale shouldbe captured that day, if opportunity offered.
Nor was this long wanting.
Tall spouts were seen to leeward; and twoboats, Stubb's and Flask's, were detached in pursuit.
Pullingfurther and further away, they at last became almost invisible to themen at the mast-head.
But suddenly in the distance, they saw a greatheap of tumultuous white water, and soon after news came from aloftthat one or both the boats must be fast.
An interval passed and theboats were in plain sight, in the act of being dragged right towardsthe ship by the towing whale.
So close did the monster come to thehull, that at first it seemed as if he meant it malice; but suddenlygoing down in a maelstrom, within three rods of the planks, he whollydisappeared from view, as if diving under the keel.
"Cut, cut!" wasthe cry from the ship to the boats, which, for one instant, seemed onthe point of being brought with a deadly dash against the vessel'sside.
But having plenty of line yet in the tubs, and the whale notsounding very rapidly, they paid out abundance of rope, and at thesame time pulled with all their might so as to get ahead of the ship.
For a few minutes the struggle was intensely critical; for whilethey still slacked out the tightened line in one direction, and stillplied their oars in another, the contending strain threatened to takethem under.
But it was only a few feet advance they sought to gain.
And they stuck to it till they did gain it; when instantly, a swifttremor was felt running like lightning along the keel, as thestrained line, scraping beneath the ship, suddenly rose to view underher bows, snapping and quivering; and so flinging off its drippings,that the drops fell like bits of broken glass on the water, while thewhale beyond also rose to sight, and once more the boats were free tofly.
But the fagged whale abated his speed, and blindly altering hiscourse, went round the stern of the ship towing the two boats afterhim, so that they performed a complete circuit.
Meantime, they hauled more and more upon their lines, till closeflanking him on both sides, Stubb answered Flask with lance forlance; and thus round and round the Pequod the battle went, while themultitudes of sharks that had before swum round the Sperm Whale'sbody, rushed to the fresh blood that was spilled, thirstily drinkingat every new gash, as the eager Israelites did at the new burstingfountains that poured from the smitten rock.
At last his spout grew thick, and with a frightful roll and vomit, heturned upon his back a corpse.
While the two headsmen were engaged in making fast cords to hisflukes, and in other ways getting the mass in readiness for towing,some conversation ensued between them.
"I wonder what the old man wants with this lump of foul lard," saidStubb, not without some disgust at the thought of having to do withso ignoble a leviathan.
"Wants with it?" said Flask, coiling some spare line in the boat'sbow, "did you never hear that the ship which but once has a SpermWhale's head hoisted on her starboard side, and at the same time aRight Whale's on the larboard; did you never hear, Stubb, that thatship can never afterwards capsize?""Why not?"I don't know, but I heard that gamboge ghost of a Fedallah sayingso, and he seems to know all about ships' charms.
But I sometimesthink he'll charm the ship to no good at last.
I don't half likethat chap, Stubb.
Did you ever notice how that tusk of his is a sortof carved into a snake's head, Stubb?""Sink him! I never look at him at all; but if ever I get a chance ofa dark night, and he standing hard by the bulwarks, and no one by;look down there, Flask"--pointing into the sea with a peculiar motionof both hands--"Aye, will I! Flask, I take that Fedallah to be thedevil in disguise.
Do you believe that cock and bull story about hishaving been stowed away on board ship? He's the devil, I say.
Thereason why you don't see his tail, is because he tucks it up out ofsight; he carries it coiled away in his pocket, I guess.
Blast him!now that I think of it, he's always wanting oakum to stuff into thetoes of his boots.
""He sleeps in his boots, don't he? He hasn't got any hammock; butI've seen him lay of nights in a coil of rigging.
""No doubt, and it's because of his cursed tail; he coils it down, doye see, in the eye of the rigging.
""What's the old man have so much to do with him for?""Striking up a swap or a bargain, I suppose.
""Bargain?--about what?""Why, do ye see, the old man is hard bent after that White Whale, andthe devil there is trying to come round him, and get him to swap awayhis silver watch, or his soul, or something of that sort, and thenhe'll surrender Moby Dick.
""Pooh! Stubb, you are skylarking; how can Fedallah do that?""I don't know, Flask, but the devil is a curious chap, and a wickedone, I tell ye.
Why, they say as how he went a sauntering into theold flag-ship once, switching his tail about devilish easy andgentlemanlike, and inquiring if the old governor was at home.
Well,he was at home, and asked the devil what he wanted.
The devil,switching his hoofs, up and says, 'I want John.
' 'What for?' saysthe old governor.
'What business is that of yours,' says the devil,getting mad,--'I want to use him.
' 'Take him,' says thegovernor--and by the Lord, Flask, if the devil didn't give John theAsiatic cholera before he got through with him, I'll eat this whalein one mouthful.
But look sharp--ain't you all ready there? Well,then, pull ahead, and let's get the whale alongside.
""I think I remember some such story as you were telling," said Flask,when at last the two boats were slowly advancing with their burdentowards the ship, "but I can't remember where.
""Three Spaniards? Adventures of those three bloody-minded soladoes?Did ye read it there, Flask? I guess ye did?""No: never saw such a book; heard of it, though.
But now, tell me,Stubb, do you suppose that that devil you was speaking of just now,was the same you say is now on board the Pequod?""Am I the same man that helped kill this whale? Doesn't the devillive for ever; who ever heard that the devil was dead? Did you eversee any parson a wearing mourning for the devil? And if the devilhas a latch-key to get into the admiral's cabin, don't you suppose hecan crawl into a porthole? Tell me that, Mr.
Flask?""How old do you suppose Fedallah is, Stubb?""Do you see that mainmast there?" pointing to the ship; "well, that'sthe figure one; now take all the hoops in the Pequod's hold, andstring along in a row with that mast, for oughts, do you see; well,that wouldn't begin to be Fedallah's age.
Nor all the coopers increation couldn't show hoops enough to make oughts enough.
""But see here, Stubb, I thought you a little boasted just now, thatyou meant to give Fedallah a sea-toss, if you got a good chance.
Now, if he's so old as all those hoops of yours come to, and if he isgoing to live for ever, what good will it do to pitch himoverboard--tell me that?"Give him a good ducking, anyhow.
""But he'd crawl back.
""Duck him again; and keep ducking him.
""Suppose he should take it into his head to duck you, though--yes,and drown you--what then?""I should like to see him try it; I'd give him such a pair of blackeyes that he wouldn't dare to show his face in the admiral's cabinagain for a long while, let alone down in the orlop there, where helives, and hereabouts on the upper decks where he sneaks so much.
Damn the devil, Flask; so you suppose I'm afraid of the devil? Who'safraid of him, except the old governor who daresn't catch him and puthim in double-darbies, as he deserves, but lets him go aboutkidnapping people; aye, and signed a bond with him, that all thepeople the devil kidnapped, he'd roast for him? There's a governor!""Do you suppose Fedallah wants to kidnap Captain Ahab?""Do I suppose it? You'll know it before long, Flask.
But I am goingnow to keep a sharp look-out on him; and if I see anything verysuspicious going on, I'll just take him by the nape of his neck, andsay--Look here, Beelzebub, you don't do it; and if he makes any fuss,by the Lord I'll make a grab into his pocket for his tail, take it tothe capstan, and give him such a wrenching and heaving, that his tailwill come short off at the stump--do you see; and then, I ratherguess when he finds himself docked in that queer fashion, he'll sneakoff without the poor satisfaction of feeling his tail between hislegs.
""And what will you do with the tail, Stubb?""Do with it? Sell it for an ox whip when we get home;--what else?""Now, do you mean what you say, and have been saying all along,Stubb?""Mean or not mean, here we are at the ship.
"The boats were here hailed, to tow the whale on the larboard side,where fluke chains and other necessaries were already prepared forsecuring him.
"Didn't I tell you so?" said Flask; "yes, you'll soon see this rightwhale's head hoisted up opposite that parmacetti's.
"In good time, Flask's saying proved true.
As before, the Pequodsteeply leaned over towards the sperm whale's head, now, by thecounterpoise of both heads, she regained her even keel; though sorelystrained, you may well believe.
So, when on one side you hoist inLocke's head, you go over that way; but now, on the other side, hoistin Kant's and you come back again; but in very poor plight.
Thus,some minds for ever keep trimming boat.
Oh, ye foolish! throw allthese thunder-heads overboard, and then you will float light andright.
In disposing of the body of a right whale, when brought alongside theship, the same preliminary proceedings commonly take place as in thecase of a sperm whale; only, in the latter instance, the head is cutoff whole, but in the former the lips and tongue are separatelyremoved and hoisted on deck, with all the well known black boneattached to what is called the crown-piece.
But nothing like this,in the present case, had been done.
The carcases of both whales haddropped astern; and the head-laden ship not a little resembled a mulecarrying a pair of overburdening panniers.
Meantime, Fedallah was calmly eyeing the right whale's head, and everand anon glancing from the deep wrinkles there to the lines in hisown hand.
And Ahab chanced so to stand, that the Parsee occupied hisshadow; while, if the Parsee's shadow was there at all it seemed onlyto blend with, and lengthen Ahab's.
As the crew toiled on,Laplandish speculations were bandied among them, concerning all thesepassing things.
The Sperm Whale's Head--Contrasted View.
Here, now, are two great whales, laying their heads together; let usjoin them, and lay together our own.
Of the grand order of folio leviathans, the Sperm Whale and the RightWhale are by far the most noteworthy.
They are the only whalesregularly hunted by man.
To the Nantucketer, they present the twoextremes of all the known varieties of the whale.
As the externaldifference between them is mainly observable in their heads; and as ahead of each is this moment hanging from the Pequod's side; and as wemay freely go from one to the other, by merely stepping across thedeck:--where, I should like to know, will you obtain a better chanceto study practical cetology than here?In the first place, you are struck by the general contrast betweenthese heads.
Both are massive enough in all conscience; but thereis a certain mathematical symmetry in the Sperm Whale's which theRight Whale's sadly lacks.
There is more character in the SpermWhale's head.
As you behold it, you involuntarily yield the immensesuperiority to him, in point of pervading dignity.
In the presentinstance, too, this dignity is heightened by the pepper and saltcolour of his head at the summit, giving token of advanced age andlarge experience.
In short, he is what the fishermen technicallycall a "grey-headed whale.
"Let us now note what is least dissimilar in these heads--namely, thetwo most important organs, the eye and the ear.
Far back on the sideof the head, and low down, near the angle of either whale's jaw, ifyou narrowly search, you will at last see a lashless eye, which youwould fancy to be a young colt's eye; so out of all proportion is itto the magnitude of the head.
Now, from this peculiar sideway position of the whale's eyes, it isplain that he can never see an object which is exactly ahead, no morethan he can one exactly astern.
In a word, the position of thewhale's eyes corresponds to that of a man's ears; and you may fancy,for yourself, how it would fare with you, did you sideways surveyobjects through your ears.
You would find that you could onlycommand some thirty degrees of vision in advance of the straightside-line of sight; and about thirty more behind it.
If yourbitterest foe were walking straight towards you, with dagger upliftedin broad day, you would not be able to see him, any more than if hewere stealing upon you from behind.
In a word, you would have twobacks, so to speak; but, at the same time, also, two fronts (sidefronts): for what is it that makes the front of a man--what, indeed,but his eyes?Moreover, while in most other animals that I can now think of, theeyes are so planted as imperceptibly to blend their visual power, soas to produce one picture and not two to the brain; the peculiarposition of the whale's eyes, effectually divided as they are by manycubic feet of solid head, which towers between them like a greatmountain separating two lakes in valleys; this, of course, mustwholly separate the impressions which each independent organ imparts.
The whale, therefore, must see one distinct picture on this side,and another distinct picture on that side; while all between must beprofound darkness and nothingness to him.
Man may, in effect, besaid to look out on the world from a sentry-box with two joinedsashes for his window.
But with the whale, these two sashes areseparately inserted, making two distinct windows, but sadly impairingthe view.
This peculiarity of the whale's eyes is a thing always tobe borne in mind in the fishery; and to be remembered by the readerin some subsequent scenes.
A curious and most puzzling question might be started concerning thisvisual matter as touching the Leviathan.
But I must be content witha hint.
So long as a man's eyes are open in the light, the act ofseeing is involuntary; that is, he cannot then help mechanicallyseeing whatever objects are before him.
Nevertheless, any one'sexperience will teach him, that though he can take in anundiscriminating sweep of things at one glance, it is quiteimpossible for him, attentively, and completely, to examine any twothings--however large or however small--at one and the same instantof time; never mind if they lie side by side and touch each other.
But if you now come to separate these two objects, and surround eachby a circle of profound darkness; then, in order to see one of them,in such a manner as to bring your mind to bear on it, the other willbe utterly excluded from your contemporary consciousness.
How is it,then, with the whale? True, both his eyes, in themselves, mustsimultaneously act; but is his brain so much more comprehensive,combining, and subtle than man's, that he can at the same moment oftime attentively examine two distinct prospects, one on one side ofhim, and the other in an exactly opposite direction? If he can, thenis it as marvellous a thing in him, as if a man were ablesimultaneously to go through the demonstrations of two distinctproblems in Euclid.
Nor, strictly investigated, is there anyincongruity in this comparison.
It may be but an idle whim, but it has always seemed to me, that theextraordinary vacillations of movement displayed by some whales whenbeset by three or four boats; the timidity and liability to queerfrights, so common to such whales; I think that all this indirectlyproceeds from the helpless perplexity of volition, in which theirdivided and diametrically opposite powers of vision must involvethem.
But the ear of the whale is full as curious as the eye.
If you arean entire stranger to their race, you might hunt over these two headsfor hours, and never discover that organ.
The ear has no externalleaf whatever; and into the hole itself you can hardly insert aquill, so wondrously minute is it.
It is lodged a little behind theeye.
With respect to their ears, this important difference is to beobserved between the sperm whale and the right.
While the ear ofthe former has an external opening, that of the latter is entirelyand evenly covered over with a membrane, so as to be quiteimperceptible from without.
Is it not curious, that so vast a being as the whale should see theworld through so small an eye, and hear the thunder through an earwhich is smaller than a hare's? But if his eyes were broad as thelens of Herschel's great telescope; and his ears capacious as theporches of cathedrals; would that make him any longer of sight, orsharper of hearing? Not at all.
--Why then do you try to "enlarge"your mind? Subtilize it.
Let us now with whatever levers and steam-engines we have at hand,cant over the sperm whale's head, that it may lie bottom up;then, ascending by a ladder to the summit, have a peep down themouth; and were it not that the body is now completely separated fromit, with a lantern we might descend into the great Kentucky MammothCave of his stomach.
But let us hold on here by this tooth, and lookabout us where we are.
What a really beautiful and chaste-lookingmouth! from floor to ceiling, lined, or rather papered with aglistening white membrane, glossy as bridal satins.
But come out now, and look at this portentous lower jaw, which seemslike the long narrow lid of an immense snuff-box, with the hinge atone end, instead of one side.
If you pry it up, so as to get itoverhead, and expose its rows of teeth, it seems a terrificportcullis; and such, alas! it proves to many a poor wight in thefishery, upon whom these spikes fall with impaling force.
But farmore terrible is it to behold, when fathoms down in the sea, you seesome sulky whale, floating there suspended, with his prodigious jaw,some fifteen feet long, hanging straight down at right-angles withhis body, for all the world like a ship's jib-boom.
This whale isnot dead; he is only dispirited; out of sorts, perhaps;hypochondriac; and so supine, that the hinges of his jaw haverelaxed, leaving him there in that ungainly sort of plight, areproach to all his tribe, who must, no doubt, imprecate lock-jawsupon him.
In most cases this lower jaw--being easily unhinged by a practisedartist--is disengaged and hoisted on deck for the purpose ofextracting the ivory teeth, and furnishing a supply of that hardwhite whalebone with which the fishermen fashion all sorts of curiousarticles, including canes, umbrella-stocks, and handles toriding-whips.
With a long, weary hoist the jaw is dragged on board, as if it werean anchor; and when the proper time comes--some few days after theother work--Queequeg, Daggoo, and Tashtego, being all accomplisheddentists, are set to drawing teeth.
With a keen cutting-spade,Queequeg lances the gums; then the jaw is lashed down to ringbolts,and a tackle being rigged from aloft, they drag out these teeth, asMichigan oxen drag stumps of old oaks out of wild wood lands.
Thereare generally forty-two teeth in all; in old whales, much worn down,but undecayed; nor filled after our artificial fashion.
The jaw isafterwards sawn into slabs, and piled away like joists for buildinghouses.
The Right Whale's Head--Contrasted View.
Crossing the deck, let us now have a good long look at the RightWhale's head.
As in general shape the noble Sperm Whale's head may be compared to aRoman war-chariot (especially in front, where it is so broadlyrounded); so, at a broad view, the Right Whale's head bears a ratherinelegant resemblance to a gigantic galliot-toed shoe.
Two hundredyears ago an old Dutch voyager likened its shape to that of ashoemaker's last.
And in this same last or shoe, that old woman ofthe nursery tale, with the swarming brood, might very comfortably belodged, she and all her progeny.
But as you come nearer to this great head it begins to assumedifferent aspects, according to your point of view.
If you stand onits summit and look at these two F-shaped spoutholes, you would takethe whole head for an enormous bass-viol, and these spiracles, theapertures in its sounding-board.
Then, again, if you fix your eyeupon this strange, crested, comb-like incrustation on the top of themass--this green, barnacled thing, which the Greenlanders call the"crown," and the Southern fishers the "bonnet" of the Right Whale;fixing your eyes solely on this, you would take the head for thetrunk of some huge oak, with a bird's nest in its crotch.
At anyrate, when you watch those live crabs that nestle here on thisbonnet, such an idea will be almost sure to occur to you; unless,indeed, your fancy has been fixed by the technical term "crown" alsobestowed upon it; in which case you will take great interest inthinking how this mighty monster is actually a diademed king of thesea, whose green crown has been put together for him in thismarvellous manner.
But if this whale be a king, he is a very sulkylooking fellow to grace a diadem.
Look at that hanging lower lip!what a huge sulk and pout is there! a sulk and pout, by carpenter'smeasurement, about twenty feet long and five feet deep; a sulk andpout that will yield you some 500 gallons of oil and more.
A great pity, now, that this unfortunate whale should be hare-lipped.
The fissure is about a foot across.
Probably the mother during animportant interval was sailing down the Peruvian coast, whenearthquakes caused the beach to gape.
Over this lip, as over aslippery threshold, we now slide into the mouth.
Upon my word were Iat Mackinaw, I should take this to be the inside of an Indian wigwam.
Good Lord! is this the road that Jonah went? The roof is abouttwelve feet high, and runs to a pretty sharp angle, as if there werea regular ridge-pole there; while these ribbed, arched, hairy sides,present us with those wondrous, half vertical, scimetar-shaped slatsof whalebone, say three hundred on a side, which depending from theupper part of the head or crown bone, form those Venetian blindswhich have elsewhere been cursorily mentioned.
The edges of thesebones are fringed with hairy fibres, through which the Right Whalestrains the water, and in whose intricacies he retains the smallfish, when openmouthed he goes through the seas of brit in feedingtime.
In the central blinds of bone, as they stand in their naturalorder, there are certain curious marks, curves, hollows, and ridges,whereby some whalemen calculate the creature's age, as the age of anoak by its circular rings.
Though the certainty of this criterion isfar from demonstrable, yet it has the savor of analogicalprobability.
At any rate, if we yield to it, we must grant a fargreater age to the Right Whale than at first glance will seemreasonable.
In old times, there seem to have prevailed the most curious fanciesconcerning these blinds.
One voyager in Purchas calls them thewondrous "whiskers" inside of the whale's mouth;* another, "hogs'bristles"; a third old gentleman in Hackluyt uses the followingelegant language: "There are about two hundred and fifty fins growingon each side of his upper CHOP, which arch over his tongue on eachside of his mouth.
"*This reminds us that the Right Whale really has a sort of whisker,or rather a moustache, consisting of a few scattered white hairs onthe upper part of the outer end of the lower jaw.
Sometimes thesetufts impart a rather brigandish expression to his otherwise solemncountenance.
As every one knows, these same "hogs' bristles," "fins," "whiskers,""blinds," or whatever you please, furnish to the ladies their busksand other stiffening contrivances.
But in this particular, thedemand has long been on the decline.
It was in Queen Anne's timethat the bone was in its glory, the farthingale being then all thefashion.
And as those ancient dames moved about gaily, though in thejaws of the whale, as you may say; even so, in a shower, with thelike thoughtlessness, do we nowadays fly under the same jaws forprotection; the umbrella being a tent spread over the same bone.
But now forget all about blinds and whiskers for a moment, and,standing in the Right Whale's mouth, look around you afresh.
Seeingall these colonnades of bone so methodically ranged about, would younot think you were inside of the great Haarlem organ, and gazingupon its thousand pipes? For a carpet to the organ we have a rug ofthe softest Turkey--the tongue, which is glued, as it were, to thefloor of the mouth.
It is very fat and tender, and apt to tear inpieces in hoisting it on deck.
This particular tongue now before us;at a passing glance I should say it was a six-barreler; that is, itwill yield you about that amount of oil.
Ere this, you must have plainly seen the truth of what I startedwith--that the Sperm Whale and the Right Whale have almost entirelydifferent heads.
To sum up, then: in the Right Whale's there is nogreat well of sperm; no ivory teeth at all; no long, slender mandibleof a lower jaw, like the Sperm Whale's.
Nor in the Sperm Whale arethere any of those blinds of bone; no huge lower lip; and scarcelyanything of a tongue.
Again, the Right Whale has two externalspout-holes, the Sperm Whale only one.
Look your last, now, on these venerable hooded heads, while they yetlie together; for one will soon sink, unrecorded, in the sea; theother will not be very long in following.
Can you catch the expression of the Sperm Whale's there? It is thesame he died with, only some of the longer wrinkles in the foreheadseem now faded away.
I think his broad brow to be full of aprairie-like placidity, born of a speculative indifference as todeath.
But mark the other head's expression.
See that amazing lowerlip, pressed by accident against the vessel's side, so as firmly toembrace the jaw.
Does not this whole head seem to speak of anenormous practical resolution in facing death? This Right Whale Itake to have been a Stoic; the Sperm Whale, a Platonian, who mighthave taken up Spinoza in his latter years.
The Battering-Ram.
Ere quitting, for the nonce, the Sperm Whale's head, I would haveyou, as a sensible physiologist, simply--particularly remark itsfront aspect, in all its compacted collectedness.
I would have youinvestigate it now with the sole view of forming to yourself someunexaggerated, intelligent estimate of whatever battering-ram powermay be lodged there.
Here is a vital point; for you must eithersatisfactorily settle this matter with yourself, or for ever remainan infidel as to one of the most appalling, but not the less trueevents, perhaps anywhere to be found in all recorded history.
You observe that in the ordinary swimming position of the SpermWhale, the front of his head presents an almost wholly vertical planeto the water; you observe that the lower part of that front slopesconsiderably backwards, so as to furnish more of a retreat for thelong socket which receives the boom-like lower jaw; you observe thatthe mouth is entirely under the head, much in the same way, indeed,as though your own mouth were entirely under your chin.
Moreover youobserve that the whale has no external nose; and that what nose hehas--his spout hole--is on the top of his head; you observe that hiseyes and ears are at the sides of his head, nearly one third of hisentire length from the front.
Wherefore, you must now have perceivedthat the front of the Sperm Whale's head is a dead, blind wall,without a single organ or tender prominence of any sort whatsoever.
Furthermore, you are now to consider that only in the extreme, lower,backward sloping part of the front of the head, is there theslightest vestige of bone; and not till you get near twenty feet fromthe forehead do you come to the full cranial development.
So thatthis whole enormous boneless mass is as one wad.
Finally, though, aswill soon be revealed, its contents partly comprise the most delicateoil; yet, you are now to be apprised of the nature of the substancewhich so impregnably invests all that apparent effeminacy.
In someprevious place I have described to you how the blubber wraps the bodyof the whale, as the rind wraps an orange.
Just so with the head;but with this difference: about the head this envelope, though not sothick, is of a boneless toughness, inestimable by any man who has nothandled it.
The severest pointed harpoon, the sharpest lance dartedby the strongest human arm, impotently rebounds from it.
It is asthough the forehead of the Sperm Whale were paved with horses' hoofs.
I do not think that any sensation lurks in it.
Bethink yourself also of another thing.
When two large, loadedIndiamen chance to crowd and crush towards each other in thedocks, what do the sailors do? They do not suspend between them, atthe point of coming contact, any merely hard substance, like iron orwood.
No, they hold there a large, round wad of tow and cork,enveloped in the thickest and toughest of ox-hide.
That bravely anduninjured takes the jam which would have snapped all their oakenhandspikes and iron crow-bars.
By itself this sufficientlyillustrates the obvious fact I drive at.
But supplementary to this,it has hypothetically occurred to me, that as ordinary fish possesswhat is called a swimming bladder in them, capable, at will, ofdistension or contraction; and as the Sperm Whale, as far as I know,has no such provision in him; considering, too, the otherwiseinexplicable manner in which he now depresses his head altogetherbeneath the surface, and anon swims with it high elevated out of thewater; considering the unobstructed elasticity of its envelope;considering the unique interior of his head; it has hypotheticallyoccurred to me, I say, that those mystical lung-celled honeycombsthere may possibly have some hitherto unknown and unsuspectedconnexion with the outer air, so as to be susceptible to atmosphericdistension and contraction.
If this be so, fancy theirresistibleness of that might, to which the most impalpable anddestructive of all elements contributes.
Now, mark.
Unerringly impelling this dead, impregnable, uninjurablewall, and this most buoyant thing within; there swims behind it all amass of tremendous life, only to be adequately estimated as piledwood is--by the cord; and all obedient to one volition, as thesmallest insect.
So that when I shall hereafter detail to you allthe specialities and concentrations of potency everywhere lurking inthis expansive monster; when I shall show you some of his moreinconsiderable braining feats; I trust you will have renounced allignorant incredulity, and be ready to abide by this; that though theSperm Whale stove a passage through the Isthmus of Darien, and mixedthe Atlantic with the Pacific, you would not elevate one hair of youreye-brow.
For unless you own the whale, you are but a provincial andsentimentalist in Truth.
But clear Truth is a thing for salamandergiants only to encounter; how small the chances for the provincialsthen? What befell the weakling youth lifting the dread goddess'sveil at Lais?The Great Heidelburgh Tun.
Now comes the Baling of the Case.
But to comprehend it aright, youmust know something of the curious internal structure of the thingoperated upon.
Regarding the Sperm Whale's head as a solid oblong, you may, on aninclined plane, sideways divide it into two quoins,* whereof thelower is the bony structure, forming the cranium and jaws, and theupper an unctuous mass wholly free from bones; its broad forward endforming the expanded vertical apparent forehead of the whale.
At themiddle of the forehead horizontally subdivide this upper quoin, andthen you have two almost equal parts, which before were naturallydivided by an internal wall of a thick tendinous substance.
*Quoin is not a Euclidean term.
It belongs to the pure nauticalmathematics.
I know not that it has been defined before.
A quoin isa solid which differs from a wedge in having its sharp end formed bythe steep inclination of one side, instead of the mutual tapering ofboth sides.
The lower subdivided part, called the junk, is one immense honeycombof oil, formed by the crossing and recrossing, into ten thousandinfiltrated cells, of tough elastic white fibres throughout its wholeextent.
The upper part, known as the Case, may be regarded as thegreat Heidelburgh Tun of the Sperm Whale.
And as that famous greattierce is mystically carved in front, so the whale's vast plaitedforehead forms innumerable strange devices for the emblematicaladornment of his wondrous tun.
Moreover, as that of Heidelburgh wasalways replenished with the most excellent of the wines of theRhenish valleys, so the tun of the whale contains by far the mostprecious of all his oily vintages; namely, the highly-prizedspermaceti, in its absolutely pure, limpid, and odoriferous state.
Nor is this precious substance found unalloyed in any other part ofthe creature.
Though in life it remains perfectly fluid, yet, uponexposure to the air, after death, it soon begins to concrete; sendingforth beautiful crystalline shoots, as when the first thin delicateice is just forming in water.
A large whale's case generally yieldsabout five hundred gallons of sperm, though from unavoidablecircumstances, considerable of it is spilled, leaks, and dribblesaway, or is otherwise irrevocably lost in the ticklish business ofsecuring what you can.
I know not with what fine and costly material the Heidelburgh Tun wascoated within, but in superlative richness that coating could notpossibly have compared with the silken pearl-coloured membrane, likethe lining of a fine pelisse, forming the inner surface of the SpermWhale's case.
It will have been seen that the Heidelburgh Tun of the Sperm Whaleembraces the entire length of the entire top of the head; andsince--as has been elsewhere set forth--the head embraces one thirdof the whole length of the creature, then setting that length down ateighty feet for a good sized whale, you have more than twenty-sixfeet for the depth of the tun, when it is lengthwise hoisted up anddown against a ship's side.
As in decapitating the whale, the operator's instrument is broughtclose to the spot where an entrance is subsequently forced into thespermaceti magazine; he has, therefore, to be uncommonly heedful,lest a careless, untimely stroke should invade the sanctuary andwastingly let out its invaluable contents.
It is this decapitatedend of the head, also, which is at last elevated out of the water,and retained in that position by the enormous cutting tackles, whosehempen combinations, on one side, make quite a wilderness of ropes inthat quarter.
Thus much being said, attend now, I pray you, to that marvellousand--in this particular instance--almost fatal operation whereby theSperm Whale's great Heidelburgh Tun is tapped.
Cistern and Buckets.
Nimble as a cat, Tashtego mounts aloft; and without altering hiserect posture, runs straight out upon the overhanging mainyard-arm,to the part where it exactly projects over the hoisted Tun.
He hascarried with him a light tackle called a whip, consisting of only twoparts, travelling through a single-sheaved block.
Securing thisblock, so that it hangs down from the yard-arm, he swings one end ofthe rope, till it is caught and firmly held by a hand on deck.
Then, hand-over-hand, down the other part, the Indian drops throughthe air, till dexterously he lands on the summit of the head.
There--still high elevated above the rest of the company, to whom hevivaciously cries--he seems some Turkish Muezzin calling the goodpeople to prayers from the top of a tower.
A short-handled sharpspade being sent up to him, he diligently searches for the properplace to begin breaking into the Tun.
In this business he proceedsvery heedfully, like a treasure-hunter in some old house, soundingthe walls to find where the gold is masoned in.
By the time thiscautious search is over, a stout iron-bound bucket, precisely like awell-bucket, has been attached to one end of the whip; while theother end, being stretched across the deck, is there held by two orthree alert hands.
These last now hoist the bucket within grasp ofthe Indian, to whom another person has reached up a very long pole.
Inserting this pole into the bucket, Tashtego downward guides thebucket into the Tun, till it entirely disappears; then giving theword to the seamen at the whip, up comes the bucket again, allbubbling like a dairy-maid's pail of new milk.
Carefully loweredfrom its height, the full-freighted vessel is caught by an appointedhand, and quickly emptied into a large tub.
Then remounting aloft,it again goes through the same round until the deep cistern willyield no more.
Towards the end, Tashtego has to ram his long poleharder and harder, and deeper and deeper into the Tun, until sometwenty feet of the pole have gone down.
Now, the people of the Pequod had been baling some time in this way;several tubs had been filled with the fragrant sperm; when all atonce a queer accident happened.
Whether it was that Tashtego, thatwild Indian, was so heedless and reckless as to let go for a momenthis one-handed hold on the great cabled tackles suspending the head;or whether the place where he stood was so treacherous and oozy; orwhether the Evil One himself would have it to fall out so, withoutstating his particular reasons; how it was exactly, there is notelling now; but, on a sudden, as the eightieth or ninetieth bucketcame suckingly up--my God! poor Tashtego--like the twin reciprocatingbucket in a veritable well, dropped head-foremost down into thisgreat Tun of Heidelburgh, and with a horrible oily gurgling, wentclean out of sight!"Man overboard!" cried Daggoo, who amid the general consternationfirst came to his senses.
"Swing the bucket this way!" and puttingone foot into it, so as the better to secure his slippery hand-holdon the whip itself, the hoisters ran him high up to the top of thehead, almost before Tashtego could have reached its interior bottom.
Meantime, there was a terrible tumult.
Looking over the side, theysaw the before lifeless head throbbing and heaving just below thesurface of the sea, as if that moment seized with some momentousidea; whereas it was only the poor Indian unconsciously revealing bythose struggles the perilous depth to which he had sunk.
At this instant, while Daggoo, on the summit of the head, wasclearing the whip--which had somehow got foul of the great cuttingtackles--a sharp cracking noise was heard; and to the unspeakablehorror of all, one of the two enormous hooks suspending the head toreout, and with a vast vibration the enormous mass sideways swung, tillthe drunk ship reeled and shook as if smitten by an iceberg.
The oneremaining hook, upon which the entire strain now depended, seemedevery instant to be on the point of giving way; an event still morelikely from the violent motions of the head.
"Come down, come down!" yelled the seamen to Daggoo, but with onehand holding on to the heavy tackles, so that if the head shoulddrop, he would still remain suspended; the negro having cleared thefoul line, rammed down the bucket into the now collapsed well,meaning that the buried harpooneer should grasp it, and so be hoistedout.
"In heaven's name, man," cried Stubb, "are you ramming home acartridge there?--Avast! How will that help him; jamming thatiron-bound bucket on top of his head? Avast, will ye!""Stand clear of the tackle!" cried a voice like the bursting of arocket.
Almost in the same instant, with a thunder-boom, the enormous massdropped into the sea, like Niagara's Table-Rock into the whirlpool;the suddenly relieved hull rolled away from it, to far down herglittering copper; and all caught their breath, as half swinging--nowover the sailors' heads, and now over the water--Daggoo, through athick mist of spray, was dimly beheld clinging to the penduloustackles, while poor, buried-alive Tashtego was sinking utterly downto the bottom of the sea! But hardly had the blinding vapour clearedaway, when a naked figure with a boarding-sword in his hand, was forone swift moment seen hovering over the bulwarks.
The next, a loudsplash announced that my brave Queequeg had dived to the rescue.
Onepacked rush was made to the side, and every eye counted every ripple,as moment followed moment, and no sign of either the sinker or thediver could be seen.
Some hands now jumped into a boat alongside,and pushed a little off from the ship.
"Ha! ha!" cried Daggoo, all at once, from his now quiet, swingingperch overhead; and looking further off from the side, we saw an armthrust upright from the blue waves; a sight strange to see, as an armthrust forth from the grass over a grave.
"Both! both!--it is both!"--cried Daggoo again with a joyful shout;and soon after, Queequeg was seen boldly striking out with one hand,and with the other clutching the long hair of the Indian.
Drawn intothe waiting boat, they were quickly brought to the deck; but Tashtegowas long in coming to, and Queequeg did not look very brisk.
Now, how had this noble rescue been accomplished? Why, diving afterthe slowly descending head, Queequeg with his keen sword had madeside lunges near its bottom, so as to scuttle a large hole there;then dropping his sword, had thrust his long arm far inwards andupwards, and so hauled out poor Tash by the head.
He averred, thatupon first thrusting in for him, a leg was presented; but wellknowing that that was not as it ought to be, and might occasion greattrouble;--he had thrust back the leg, and by a dexterous heave andtoss, had wrought a somerset upon the Indian; so that with the nexttrial, he came forth in the good old way--head foremost.
As for thegreat head itself, that was doing as well as could be expected.
And thus, through the courage and great skill in obstetrics ofQueequeg, the deliverance, or rather, delivery of Tashtego, wassuccessfully accomplished, in the teeth, too, of the most untowardand apparently hopeless impediments; which is a lesson by no means tobe forgotten.
Midwifery should be taught in the same course withfencing and boxing, riding and rowing.
I know that this queer adventure of the Gay-Header's will be sure toseem incredible to some landsmen, though they themselves may haveeither seen or heard of some one's falling into a cistern ashore; anaccident which not seldom happens, and with much less reason too thanthe Indian's, considering the exceeding slipperiness of the curb ofthe Sperm Whale's well.
But, peradventure, it may be sagaciously urged, how is this? Wethought the tissued, infiltrated head of the Sperm Whale, was thelightest and most corky part about him; and yet thou makest it sinkin an element of a far greater specific gravity than itself.
We havethee there.
Not at all, but I have ye; for at the time poor Tashfell in, the case had been nearly emptied of its lighter contents,leaving little but the dense tendinous wall of the well--a doublewelded, hammered substance, as I have before said, much heavier thanthe sea water, and a lump of which sinks in it like lead almost.
Butthe tendency to rapid sinking in this substance was in the presentinstance materially counteracted by the other parts of the headremaining undetached from it, so that it sank very slowly anddeliberately indeed, affording Queequeg a fair chance for performinghis agile obstetrics on the run, as you may say.
Yes, it was arunning delivery, so it was.
Now, had Tashtego perished in that head, it had been a very preciousperishing; smothered in the very whitest and daintiest of fragrantspermaceti; coffined, hearsed, and tombed in the secret inner chamberand sanctum sanctorum of the whale.
Only one sweeter end can readilybe recalled--the delicious death of an Ohio honey-hunter, who seekinghoney in the crotch of a hollow tree, found such exceeding store ofit, that leaning too far over, it sucked him in, so that he diedembalmed.
How many, think ye, have likewise fallen into Plato'shoney head, and sweetly perished there?The Prairie.
To scan the lines of his face, or feel the bumps on the head of thisLeviathan; this is a thing which no Physiognomist or Phrenologist hasas yet undertaken.
Such an enterprise would seem almost as hopefulas for Lavater to have scrutinized the wrinkles on the Rock ofGibraltar, or for Gall to have mounted a ladder and manipulated theDome of the Pantheon.
Still, in that famous work of his, Lavaternot only treats of the various faces of men, but also attentivelystudies the faces of horses, birds, serpents, and fish; and dwells indetail upon the modifications of expression discernible therein.
Norhave Gall and his disciple Spurzheim failed to throw out some hintstouching the phrenological characteristics of other beings than man.
Therefore, though I am but ill qualified for a pioneer, in theapplication of these two semi-sciences to the whale, I will do myendeavor.
I try all things; I achieve what I can.
Physiognomically regarded, the Sperm Whale is an anomalous creature.
He has no proper nose.
And since the nose is the central and mostconspicuous of the features; and since it perhaps most modifies andfinally controls their combined expression; hence it would seem thatits entire absence, as an external appendage, must very largelyaffect the countenance of the whale.
For as in landscape gardening,a spire, cupola, monument, or tower of some sort, is deemed almostindispensable to the completion of the scene; so no face can bephysiognomically in keeping without the elevated open-work belfry ofthe nose.
Dash the nose from Phidias's marble Jove, and what a sorryremainder! Nevertheless, Leviathan is of so mighty a magnitude, allhis proportions are so stately, that the same deficiency which in thesculptured Jove were hideous, in him is no blemish at all.
Nay, itis an added grandeur.
A nose to the whale would have beenimpertinent.
As on your physiognomical voyage you sail round hisvast head in your jolly-boat, your noble conceptions of him are neverinsulted by the reflection that he has a nose to be pulled.
Apestilent conceit, which so often will insist upon obtruding evenwhen beholding the mightiest royal beadle on his throne.
In some particulars, perhaps the most imposing physiognomical viewto be had of the Sperm Whale, is that of the full front of his head.
This aspect is sublime.
In thought, a fine human brow is like the East when troubled withthe morning.
In the repose of the pasture, the curled brow of thebull has a touch of the grand in it.
Pushing heavy cannon upmountain defiles, the elephant's brow is majestic.
Human or animal,the mystical brow is as that great golden seal affixed by the GermanEmperors to their decrees.
It signifies--"God: done this day by myhand.
" But in most creatures, nay in man himself, very often thebrow is but a mere strip of alpine land lying along the snow line.
Few are the foreheads which like Shakespeare's or Melancthon's riseso high, and descend so low, that the eyes themselves seem clear,eternal, tideless mountain lakes; and all above them in the forehead'swrinkles, you seem to track the antlered thoughts descending there todrink, as the Highland hunters track the snow prints of the deer.
But in the great Sperm Whale, this high and mighty god-like dignityinherent in the brow is so immensely amplified, that gazing on it, inthat full front view, you feel the Deity and the dread powers moreforcibly than in beholding any other object in living nature.
Foryou see no one point precisely; not one distinct feature is revealed;no nose, eyes, ears, or mouth; no face; he has none, proper; nothingbut that one broad firmament of a forehead, pleated with riddles;dumbly lowering with the doom of boats, and ships, and men.
Nor, inprofile, does this wondrous brow diminish; though that way viewed itsgrandeur does not domineer upon you so.
In profile, you plainlyperceive that horizontal, semi-crescentic depression in theforehead's middle, which, in man, is Lavater's mark of genius.
But how? Genius in the Sperm Whale? Has the Sperm Whale everwritten a book, spoken a speech? No, his great genius is declared inhis doing nothing particular to prove it.
It is moreover declared inhis pyramidical silence.
And this reminds me that had the greatSperm Whale been known to the young Orient World, he would have beendeified by their child-magian thoughts.
They deified the crocodileof the Nile, because the crocodile is tongueless; and the Sperm Whalehas no tongue, or at least it is so exceedingly small, as to beincapable of protrusion.
If hereafter any highly cultured, poeticalnation shall lure back to their birth-right, the merry May-day godsof old; and livingly enthrone them again in the now egotistical sky;in the now unhaunted hill; then be sure, exalted to Jove's high seat,the great Sperm Whale shall lord it.
Champollion deciphered the wrinkled granite hieroglyphics.
But thereis no Champollion to decipher the Egypt of every man's and everybeing's face.
Physiognomy, like every other human science, is but apassing fable.
If then, Sir William Jones, who read in thirtylanguages, could not read the simplest peasant's face in itsprofounder and more subtle meanings, how may unlettered Ishmael hopeto read the awful Chaldee of the Sperm Whale's brow? I but put thatbrow before you.
Read it if you can.
The Nut.
If the Sperm Whale be physiognomically a Sphinx, to the phrenologisthis brain seems that geometrical circle which it is impossible tosquare.
In the full-grown creature the skull will measure at least twentyfeet in length.
Unhinge the lower jaw, and the side view of thisskull is as the side of a moderately inclined plane restingthroughout on a level base.
But in life--as we have elsewhereseen--this inclined plane is angularly filled up, and almost squaredby the enormous superincumbent mass of the junk and sperm.
At thehigh end the skull forms a crater to bed that part of the mass; whileunder the long floor of this crater--in another cavity seldomexceeding ten inches in length and as many in depth--reposes themere handful of this monster's brain.
The brain is at least twentyfeet from his apparent forehead in life; it is hidden away behind itsvast outworks, like the innermost citadel within the amplifiedfortifications of Quebec.
So like a choice casket is it secreted inhim, that I have known some whalemen who peremptorily deny that theSperm Whale has any other brain than that palpable semblance of oneformed by the cubic-yards of his sperm magazine.
Lying in strangefolds, courses, and convolutions, to their apprehensions, it seemsmore in keeping with the idea of his general might to regard thatmystic part of him as the seat of his intelligence.
It is plain, then, that phrenologically the head of this Leviathan,in the creature's living intact state, is an entire delusion.
As forhis true brain, you can then see no indications of it, nor feel any.
The whale, like all things that are mighty, wears a false brow to thecommon world.
If you unload his skull of its spermy heaps and then take a rear viewof its rear end, which is the high end, you will be struck by itsresemblance to the human skull, beheld in the same situation, andfrom the same point of view.
Indeed, place this reversed skull(scaled down to the human magnitude) among a plate of men's skulls,and you would involuntarily confound it with them; and remarking thedepressions on one part of its summit, in phrenological phrase youwould say--This man had no self-esteem, and no veneration.
And bythose negations, considered along with the affirmative fact of hisprodigious bulk and power, you can best form to yourself the truest,though not the most exhilarating conception of what the most exaltedpotency is.
But if from the comparative dimensions of the whale's proper brain,you deem it incapable of being adequately charted, then I haveanother idea for you.
If you attentively regard almost anyquadruped's spine, you will be struck with the resemblance of itsvertebrae to a strung necklace of dwarfed skulls, all bearingrudimental resemblance to the skull proper.
It is a German conceit,that the vertebrae are absolutely undeveloped skulls.
But thecurious external resemblance, I take it the Germans were not thefirst men to perceive.
A foreign friend once pointed it out to me,in the skeleton of a foe he had slain, and with the vertebrae ofwhich he was inlaying, in a sort of basso-relievo, the beaked prowof his canoe.
Now, I consider that the phrenologists have omitted animportant thing in not pushing their investigations from thecerebellum through the spinal canal.
For I believe that much of aman's character will be found betokened in his backbone.
I wouldrather feel your spine than your skull, whoever you are.
A thinjoist of a spine never yet upheld a full and noble soul.
I rejoicein my spine, as in the firm audacious staff of that flag which Ifling half out to the world.
Apply this spinal branch of phrenology to the Sperm Whale.
Hiscranial cavity is continuous with the first neck-vertebra; and inthat vertebra the bottom of the spinal canal will measure ten inchesacross, being eight in height, and of a triangular figure with thebase downwards.
As it passes through the remaining vertebrae thecanal tapers in size, but for a considerable distance remains oflarge capacity.
Now, of course, this canal is filled with much thesame strangely fibrous substance--the spinal cord--as the brain; anddirectly communicates with the brain.
And what is still more, formany feet after emerging from the brain's cavity, the spinal cordremains of an undecreasing girth, almost equal to that of the brain.
Under all these circumstances, would it be unreasonable to survey andmap out the whale's spine phrenologically? For, viewed in thislight, the wonderful comparative smallness of his brain proper ismore than compensated by the wonderful comparative magnitude of hisspinal cord.
But leaving this hint to operate as it may with the phrenologists, Iwould merely assume the spinal theory for a moment, in reference tothe Sperm Whale's hump.
This august hump, if I mistake not, risesover one of the larger vertebrae, and is, therefore, in some sort,the outer convex mould of it.
From its relative situation then, Ishould call this high hump the organ of firmness or indomitablenessin the Sperm Whale.
And that the great monster is indomitable, youwill yet have reason to know.
The Pequod Meets The Virgin.
The predestinated day arrived, and we duly met the ship Jungfrau,Derick De Deer, master, of Bremen.
At one time the greatest whaling people in the world, the Dutch andGermans are now among the least; but here and there at very wideintervals of latitude and longitude, you still occasionally meet withtheir flag in the Pacific.
For some reason, the Jungfrau seemed quite eager to pay her respects.
While yet some distance from the Pequod, she rounded to, anddropping a boat, her captain was impelled towards us, impatientlystanding in the bows instead of the stern.
"What has he in his hand there?" cried Starbuck, pointing tosomething wavingly held by the German.
"Impossible!--a lamp-feeder!""Not that," said Stubb, "no, no, it's a coffee-pot, Mr.
Starbuck;he's coming off to make us our coffee, is the Yarman; don't you seethat big tin can there alongside of him?--that's his boiling water.
Oh! he's all right, is the Yarman.
""Go along with you," cried Flask, "it's a lamp-feeder and an oil-can.
He's out of oil, and has come a-begging.
"However curious it may seem for an oil-ship to be borrowing oil onthe whale-ground, and however much it may invertedly contradict theold proverb about carrying coals to Newcastle, yet sometimes such athing really happens; and in the present case Captain Derick De Deerdid indubitably conduct a lamp-feeder as Flask did declare.
As he mounted the deck, Ahab abruptly accosted him, without at allheeding what he had in his hand; but in his broken lingo, the Germansoon evinced his complete ignorance of the White Whale; immediatelyturning the conversation to his lamp-feeder and oil can, with someremarks touching his having to turn into his hammock at night inprofound darkness--his last drop of Bremen oil being gone, and not asingle flying-fish yet captured to supply the deficiency; concludingby hinting that his ship was indeed what in the Fishery istechnically called a CLEAN one (that is, an empty one), welldeserving the name of Jungfrau or the Virgin.
His necessities supplied, Derick departed; but he had not gained hisship's side, when whales were almost simultaneously raised from themast-heads of both vessels; and so eager for the chase was Derick,that without pausing to put his oil-can and lamp-feeder aboard, heslewed round his boat and made after the leviathan lamp-feeders.
Now, the game having risen to leeward, he and the other three Germanboats that soon followed him, had considerably the start of thePequod's keels.
There were eight whales, an average pod.
Aware oftheir danger, they were going all abreast with great speed straightbefore the wind, rubbing their flanks as closely as so many spans ofhorses in harness.
They left a great, wide wake, as thoughcontinually unrolling a great wide parchment upon the sea.
Full in this rapid wake, and many fathoms in the rear, swam a huge,humped old bull, which by his comparatively slow progress, as well asby the unusual yellowish incrustations overgrowing him, seemedafflicted with the jaundice, or some other infirmity.
Whether thiswhale belonged to the pod in advance, seemed questionable; for it isnot customary for such venerable leviathans to be at all social.
Nevertheless, he stuck to their wake, though indeed their back watermust have retarded him, because the white-bone or swell at his broadmuzzle was a dashed one, like the swell formed when two hostilecurrents meet.
His spout was short, slow, and laborious; comingforth with a choking sort of gush, and spending itself in tornshreds, followed by strange subterranean commotions in him, whichseemed to have egress at his other buried extremity, causing thewaters behind him to upbubble.
"Who's got some paregoric?" said Stubb, "he has the stomach-ache, I'mafraid.
Lord, think of having half an acre of stomach-ache! Adversewinds are holding mad Christmas in him, boys.
It's the first foulwind I ever knew to blow from astern; but look, did ever whale yawso before? it must be, he's lost his tiller.
"As an overladen Indiaman bearing down the Hindostan coast with a deckload of frightened horses, careens, buries, rolls, and wallows on herway; so did this old whale heave his aged bulk, and now and thenpartly turning over on his cumbrous rib-ends, expose the cause of hisdevious wake in the unnatural stump of his starboard fin.
Whether hehad lost that fin in battle, or had been born without it, it werehard to say.
"Only wait a bit, old chap, and I'll give ye a sling for that woundedarm," cried cruel Flask, pointing to the whale-line near him.
"Mind he don't sling thee with it," cried Starbuck.
"Give way, orthe German will have him.
"With one intent all the combined rival boats were pointed for thisone fish, because not only was he the largest, and therefore the mostvaluable whale, but he was nearest to them, and the other whales weregoing with such great velocity, moreover, as almost to defy pursuitfor the time.
At this juncture the Pequod's keels had shot by thethree German boats last lowered; but from the great start he had had,Derick's boat still led the chase, though every moment neared by hisforeign rivals.
The only thing they feared, was, that from beingalready so nigh to his mark, he would be enabled to dart his ironbefore they could completely overtake and pass him.
As for Derick,he seemed quite confident that this would be the case, andoccasionally with a deriding gesture shook his lamp-feeder at theother boats.
"The ungracious and ungrateful dog!" cried Starbuck; "he mocks anddares me with the very poor-box I filled for him not five minutesago!"--then in his old intense whisper--"Give way, greyhounds! Dogto it!""I tell ye what it is, men"--cried Stubb to his crew--"it's againstmy religion to get mad; but I'd like to eat that villainousYarman--Pull--won't ye? Are ye going to let that rascal beat ye? Doye love brandy? A hogshead of brandy, then, to the best man.
Come,why don't some of ye burst a blood-vessel? Who's that been droppingan anchor overboard--we don't budge an inch--we're becalmed.
Halloo,here's grass growing in the boat's bottom--and by the Lord, the mastthere's budding.
This won't do, boys.
Look at that Yarman! Theshort and long of it is, men, will ye spit fire or not?""Oh! see the suds he makes!" cried Flask, dancing up and down--"Whata hump--Oh, DO pile on the beef--lays like a log! Oh! my lads, DOspring--slap-jacks and quahogs for supper, you know, my lads--bakedclams and muffins--oh, DO, DO, spring,--he's a hundred barreller--don'tlose him now--don't oh, DON'T!--see that Yarman--Oh,won't ye pull for your duff, my lads--such a sog! such a sogger!Don't ye love sperm? There goes three thousand dollars, men!--abank!--a whole bank! The bank of England!--Oh, DO, DO, DO!--What'sthat Yarman about now?"At this moment Derick was in the act of pitching his lamp-feeder atthe advancing boats, and also his oil-can; perhaps with the doubleview of retarding his rivals' way, and at the same time economicallyaccelerating his own by the momentary impetus of the backward toss.
"The unmannerly Dutch dogger!" cried Stubb.
"Pull now, men, likefifty thousand line-of-battle-ship loads of red-haired devils.
Whatd'ye say, Tashtego; are you the man to snap your spine intwo-and-twenty pieces for the honour of old Gayhead? What d'ye say?""I say, pull like god-dam,"--cried the Indian.
Fiercely, but evenly incited by the taunts of the German, thePequod's three boats now began ranging almost abreast; and, sodisposed, momentarily neared him.
In that fine, loose, chivalrousattitude of the headsman when drawing near to his prey, the threemates stood up proudly, occasionally backing the after oarsman withan exhilarating cry of, "There she slides, now! Hurrah for thewhite-ash breeze! Down with the Yarman! Sail over him!"But so decided an original start had Derick had, that spite of alltheir gallantry, he would have proved the victor in this race, hadnot a righteous judgment descended upon him in a crab which caughtthe blade of his midship oarsman.
While this clumsy lubber wasstriving to free his white-ash, and while, in consequence, Derick'sboat was nigh to capsizing, and he thundering away at his men in amighty rage;--that was a good time for Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask.
With a shout, they took a mortal start forwards, and slantinglyranged up on the German's quarter.
An instant more, and all fourboats were diagonically in the whale's immediate wake, whilestretching from them, on both sides, was the foaming swell that hemade.
It was a terrific, most pitiable, and maddening sight.
The whale wasnow going head out, and sending his spout before him in a continualtormented jet; while his one poor fin beat his side in an agony offright.
Now to this hand, now to that, he yawed in his falteringflight, and still at every billow that he broke, he spasmodicallysank in the sea, or sideways rolled towards the sky his one beatingfin.
So have I seen a bird with clipped wing making affrightedbroken circles in the air, vainly striving to escape the piraticalhawks.
But the bird has a voice, and with plaintive cries will makeknown her fear; but the fear of this vast dumb brute of the sea, waschained up and enchanted in him; he had no voice, save that chokingrespiration through his spiracle, and this made the sight of himunspeakably pitiable; while still, in his amazing bulk, portcullisjaw, and omnipotent tail, there was enough to appal the stoutest manwho so pitied.
Seeing now that but a very few moments more would give the Pequod'sboats the advantage, and rather than be thus foiled of his game,Derick chose to hazard what to him must have seemed a most unusuallylong dart, ere the last chance would for ever escape.
But no sooner did his harpooneer stand up for the stroke, than allthree tigers--Queequeg, Tashtego, Daggoo--instinctively sprang totheir feet, and standing in a diagonal row, simultaneously pointedtheir barbs; and darted over the head of the German harpooneer, theirthree Nantucket irons entered the whale.
Blinding vapours of foam andwhite-fire! The three boats, in the first fury of the whale'sheadlong rush, bumped the German's aside with such force, that bothDerick and his baffled harpooneer were spilled out, and sailed overby the three flying keels.
"Don't be afraid, my butter-boxes," cried Stubb, casting a passingglance upon them as he shot by; "ye'll be picked up presently--allright--I saw some sharks astern--St.
Bernard's dogs, youknow--relieve distressed travellers.
Hurrah! this is the way to sailnow.
Every keel a sunbeam! Hurrah!--Here we go like three tinkettles at the tail of a mad cougar! This puts me in mind offastening to an elephant in a tilbury on a plain--makes thewheel-spokes fly, boys, when you fasten to him that way; and there'sdanger of being pitched out too, when you strike a hill.
Hurrah!this is the way a fellow feels when he's going to Davy Jones--all arush down an endless inclined plane! Hurrah! this whale carries theeverlasting mail!"But the monster's run was a brief one.
Giving a sudden gasp, hetumultuously sounded.
With a grating rush, the three lines flewround the loggerheads with such a force as to gouge deep grooves inthem; while so fearful were the harpooneers that this rapid soundingwould soon exhaust the lines, that using all their dexterous might,they caught repeated smoking turns with the rope to hold on; till atlast--owing to the perpendicular strain from the lead-lined chocks ofthe boats, whence the three ropes went straight down into theblue--the gunwales of the bows were almost even with the water, whilethe three sterns tilted high in the air.
And the whale soon ceasingto sound, for some time they remained in that attitude, fearful ofexpending more line, though the position was a little ticklish.
Butthough boats have been taken down and lost in this way, yet it isthis "holding on," as it is called; this hooking up by the sharpbarbs of his live flesh from the back; this it is that often tormentsthe Leviathan into soon rising again to meet the sharp lance of hisfoes.
Yet not to speak of the peril of the thing, it is to bedoubted whether this course is always the best; for it is butreasonable to presume, that the longer the stricken whale stays underwater, the more he is exhausted.
Because, owing to the enormoussurface of him--in a full grown sperm whale something less than 2000square feet--the pressure of the water is immense.
We all know whatan astonishing atmospheric weight we ourselves stand up under; evenhere, above-ground, in the air; how vast, then, the burden of awhale, bearing on his back a column of two hundred fathoms of ocean!It must at least equal the weight of fifty atmospheres.
One whalemanhas estimated it at the weight of twenty line-of-battle ships, withall their guns, and stores, and men on board.
As the three boats lay there on that gently rolling sea, gazing downinto its eternal blue noon; and as not a single groan or cry of anysort, nay, not so much as a ripple or a bubble came up from itsdepths; what landsman would have thought, that beneath all thatsilence and placidity, the utmost monster of the seas was writhingand wrenching in agony! Not eight inches of perpendicular rope werevisible at the bows.
Seems it credible that by three such thinthreads the great Leviathan was suspended like the big weight to aneight day clock.
Suspended? and to what? To three bits of board.
Is this the creature of whom it was once so triumphantly said--"Canstthou fill his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish-spears?The sword of him that layeth at him cannot hold, the spear, the dart,nor the habergeon: he esteemeth iron as straw; the arrow cannot makehim flee; darts are counted as stubble; he laugheth at the shaking ofa spear!" This the creature? this he? Oh! that unfulfilments shouldfollow the prophets.
For with the strength of a thousand thighs inhis tail, Leviathan had run his head under the mountains of the sea,to hide him from the Pequod's fish-spears!In that sloping afternoon sunlight, the shadows that the three boatssent down beneath the surface, must have been long enough and broadenough to shade half Xerxes' army.
Who can tell how appalling to thewounded whale must have been such huge phantoms flitting over hishead!"Stand by, men; he stirs," cried Starbuck, as the three linessuddenly vibrated in the water, distinctly conducting upwards tothem, as by magnetic wires, the life and death throbs of the whale,so that every oarsman felt them in his seat.
The next moment,relieved in great part from the downward strain at the bows, theboats gave a sudden bounce upwards, as a small icefield will, when adense herd of white bears are scared from it into the sea.
"Haul in! Haul in!" cried Starbuck again; "he's rising.
"The lines, of which, hardly an instant before, not one hand's breadthcould have been gained, were now in long quick coils flung back alldripping into the boats, and soon the whale broke water within twoship's lengths of the hunters.
His motions plainly denoted his extreme exhaustion.
In most landanimals there are certain valves or flood-gates in many of theirveins, whereby when wounded, the blood is in some degree at leastinstantly shut off in certain directions.
Not so with the whale; oneof whose peculiarities it is to have an entire non-valvular structureof the blood-vessels, so that when pierced even by so small a pointas a harpoon, a deadly drain is at once begun upon his wholearterial system; and when this is heightened by the extraordinarypressure of water at a great distance below the surface, his life maybe said to pour from him in incessant streams.
Yet so vast is thequantity of blood in him, and so distant and numerous its interiorfountains, that he will keep thus bleeding and bleeding for aconsiderable period; even as in a drought a river will flow, whosesource is in the well-springs of far-off and undiscernible hills.
Even now, when the boats pulled upon this whale, and perilously drewover his swaying flukes, and the lances were darted into him, theywere followed by steady jets from the new made wound, which keptcontinually playing, while the natural spout-hole in his head wasonly at intervals, however rapid, sending its affrighted moistureinto the air.
From this last vent no blood yet came, because novital part of him had thus far been struck.
His life, as theysignificantly call it, was untouched.
As the boats now more closely surrounded him, the whole upper part ofhis form, with much of it that is ordinarily submerged, was plainlyrevealed.
His eyes, or rather the places where his eyes had been,were beheld.
As strange misgrown masses gather in the knot-holes ofthe noblest oaks when prostrate, so from the points which the whale'seyes had once occupied, now protruded blind bulbs, horribly pitiableto see.
But pity there was none.
For all his old age, and his onearm, and his blind eyes, he must die the death and be murdered, inorder to light the gay bridals and other merry-makings of men, andalso to illuminate the solemn churches that preach unconditionalinoffensiveness by all to all.
Still rolling in his blood, at lasthe partially disclosed a strangely discoloured bunch or protuberance,the size of a bushel, low down on the flank.
"A nice spot," cried Flask; "just let me prick him there once.
""Avast!" cried Starbuck, "there's no need of that!"But humane Starbuck was too late.
At the instant of the dart anulcerous jet shot from this cruel wound, and goaded by it into morethan sufferable anguish, the whale now spouting thick blood, withswift fury blindly darted at the craft, bespattering them and theirglorying crews all over with showers of gore, capsizing Flask's boatand marring the bows.
It was his death stroke.
For, by this time,so spent was he by loss of blood, that he helplessly rolled away fromthe wreck he had made; lay panting on his side, impotently flappedwith his stumped fin, then over and over slowly revolved like awaning world; turned up the white secrets of his belly; lay like alog, and died.
It was most piteous, that last expiring spout.
Aswhen by unseen hands the water is gradually drawn off from somemighty fountain, and with half-stifled melancholy gurglings thespray-column lowers and lowers to the ground--so the last long dyingspout of the whale.
Soon, while the crews were awaiting the arrival of the ship, the bodyshowed symptoms of sinking with all its treasures unrifled.
Immediately, by Starbuck's orders, lines were secured to it atdifferent points, so that ere long every boat was a buoy; the sunkenwhale being suspended a few inches beneath them by the cords.
Byvery heedful management, when the ship drew nigh, the whale wastransferred to her side, and was strongly secured there by thestiffest fluke-chains, for it was plain that unless artificiallyupheld, the body would at once sink to the bottom.
It so chanced that almost upon first cutting into him with thespade, the entire length of a corroded harpoon was found imbedded inhis flesh, on the lower part of the bunch before described.
But asthe stumps of harpoons are frequently found in the dead bodies ofcaptured whales, with the flesh perfectly healed around them, and noprominence of any kind to denote their place; therefore, there mustneeds have been some other unknown reason in the present case fullyto account for the ulceration alluded to.
But still more curious wasthe fact of a lance-head of stone being found in him, not far fromthe buried iron, the flesh perfectly firm about it.
Who had dartedthat stone lance? And when? It might have been darted by some Nor'West Indian long before America was discovered.
What other marvels might have been rummaged out of this monstrouscabinet there is no telling.
But a sudden stop was put to furtherdiscoveries, by the ship's being unprecedentedly dragged oversideways to the sea, owing to the body's immensely increasingtendency to sink.
However, Starbuck, who had the ordering ofaffairs, hung on to it to the last; hung on to it so resolutely,indeed, that when at length the ship would have been capsized, ifstill persisting in locking arms with the body; then, when thecommand was given to break clear from it, such was the immovablestrain upon the timber-heads to which the fluke-chains and cableswere fastened, that it was impossible to cast them off.
Meantimeeverything in the Pequod was aslant.
To cross to the other side ofthe deck was like walking up the steep gabled roof of a house.
Theship groaned and gasped.
Many of the ivory inlayings of her bulwarksand cabins were started from their places, by the unnaturaldislocation.
In vain handspikes and crows were brought to bear uponthe immovable fluke-chains, to pry them adrift from the timberheads;and so low had the whale now settled that the submerged ends couldnot be at all approached, while every moment whole tons ofponderosity seemed added to the sinking bulk, and the ship seemed onthe point of going over.
"Hold on, hold on, won't ye?" cried Stubb to the body, "don't be insuch a devil of a hurry to sink! By thunder, men, we must dosomething or go for it.
No use prying there; avast, I say with yourhandspikes, and run one of ye for a prayer book and a pen-knife, andcut the big chains.
""Knife? Aye, aye," cried Queequeg, and seizing the carpenter's heavyhatchet, he leaned out of a porthole, and steel to iron, beganslashing at the largest fluke-chains.
But a few strokes, full ofsparks, were given, when the exceeding strain effected the rest.
With a terrific snap, every fastening went adrift; the ship righted,the carcase sank.
Now, this occasional inevitable sinking of the recently killed SpermWhale is a very curious thing; nor has any fisherman yet adequatelyaccounted for it.
Usually the dead Sperm Whale floats with greatbuoyancy, with its side or belly considerably elevated above thesurface.
If the only whales that thus sank were old, meagre, andbroken-hearted creatures, their pads of lard diminished and all theirbones heavy and rheumatic; then you might with some reason assertthat this sinking is caused by an uncommon specific gravity in thefish so sinking, consequent upon this absence of buoyant matter inhim.
But it is not so.
For young whales, in the highest health, andswelling with noble aspirations, prematurely cut off in the warmflush and May of life, with all their panting lard about them; eventhese brawny, buoyant heroes do sometimes sink.
Be it said, however, that the Sperm Whale is far less liable to thisaccident than any other species.
Where one of that sort go down,twenty Right Whales do.
This difference in the species is no doubtimputable in no small degree to the greater quantity of bone in theRight Whale; his Venetian blinds alone sometimes weighing more than aton; from this incumbrance the Sperm Whale is wholly free.
But thereare instances where, after the lapse of many hours or several days,the sunken whale again rises, more buoyant than in life.
But thereason of this is obvious.
Gases are generated in him; he swells toa prodigious magnitude; becomes a sort of animal balloon.
Aline-of-battle ship could hardly keep him under then.
In the ShoreWhaling, on soundings, among the Bays of New Zealand, when a RightWhale gives token of sinking, they fasten buoys to him, with plentyof rope; so that when the body has gone down, they know where to lookfor it when it shall have ascended again.
It was not long after the sinking of the body that a cry was heardfrom the Pequod's mast-heads, announcing that the Jungfrau was againlowering her boats; though the only spout in sight was that of aFin-Back, belonging to the species of uncapturable whales, because ofits incredible power of swimming.
Nevertheless, the Fin-Back's spoutis so similar to the Sperm Whale's, that by unskilful fishermen it isoften mistaken for it.
And consequently Derick and all his host werenow in valiant chase of this unnearable brute.
The Virgin crowdingall sail, made after her four young keels, and thus they alldisappeared far to leeward, still in bold, hopeful chase.
Oh! many are the Fin-Backs, and many are the Dericks, my friend.
The Honour and Glory of Whaling.
There are some enterprises in which a careful disorderliness is thetrue method.
The more I dive into this matter of whaling, and push my researchesup to the very spring-head of it so much the more am I impressed withits great honourableness and antiquity; and especially when I find somany great demi-gods and heroes, prophets of all sorts, who one wayor other have shed distinction upon it, I am transported with thereflection that I myself belong, though but subordinately, to soemblazoned a fraternity.
The gallant Perseus, a son of Jupiter, was the first whaleman; and tothe eternal honour of our calling be it said, that the first whaleattacked by our brotherhood was not killed with any sordid intent.
Those were the knightly days of our profession, when we only borearms to succor the distressed, and not to fill men's lamp-feeders.
Every one knows the fine story of Perseus and Andromeda; how thelovely Andromeda, the daughter of a king, was tied to a rock on thesea-coast, and as Leviathan was in the very act of carrying her off,Perseus, the prince of whalemen, intrepidly advancing, harpooned themonster, and delivered and married the maid.
It was an admirableartistic exploit, rarely achieved by the best harpooneers of thepresent day; inasmuch as this Leviathan was slain at the very firstdart.
And let no man doubt this Arkite story; for in the ancientJoppa, now Jaffa, on the Syrian coast, in one of the Pagan temples,there stood for many ages the vast skeleton of a whale, which thecity's legends and all the inhabitants asserted to be the identicalbones of the monster that Perseus slew.
When the Romans took Joppa,the same skeleton was carried to Italy in triumph.
What seems mostsingular and suggestively important in this story, is this: it wasfrom Joppa that Jonah set sail.
Akin to the adventure of Perseus and Andromeda--indeed, by somesupposed to be indirectly derived from it--is that famous story ofSt.
George and the Dragon; which dragon I maintain to have been awhale; for in many old chronicles whales and dragons are strangelyjumbled together, and often stand for each other.
"Thou art as alion of the waters, and as a dragon of the sea," saith Ezekiel;hereby, plainly meaning a whale; in truth, some versions of the Bibleuse that word itself.
Besides, it would much subtract from the gloryof the exploit had St.
George but encountered a crawling reptile ofthe land, instead of doing battle with the great monster of the deep.
Any man may kill a snake, but only a Perseus, a St.
George, aCoffin, have the heart in them to march boldly up to a whale.
Let not the modern paintings of this scene mislead us; for though thecreature encountered by that valiant whaleman of old is vaguelyrepresented of a griffin-like shape, and though the battle isdepicted on land and the saint on horseback, yet considering thegreat ignorance of those times, when the true form of the whale wasunknown to artists; and considering that as in Perseus' case, St.
George's whale might have crawled up out of the sea on the beach; andconsidering that the animal ridden by St.
George might have been onlya large seal, or sea-horse; bearing all this in mind, it will notappear altogether incompatible with the sacred legend and theancientest draughts of the scene, to hold this so-called dragon noother than the great Leviathan himself.
In fact, placed before thestrict and piercing truth, this whole story will fare like that fish,flesh, and fowl idol of the Philistines, Dagon by name; who beingplanted before the ark of Israel, his horse's head and both the palmsof his hands fell off from him, and only the stump or fishy part ofhim remained.
Thus, then, one of our own noble stamp, even awhaleman, is the tutelary guardian of England; and by good rights, weharpooneers of Nantucket should be enrolled in the most noble orderof St.
George.
And therefore, let not the knights of that honourablecompany (none of whom, I venture to say, have ever had to do with awhale like their great patron), let them never eye a Nantucketer withdisdain, since even in our woollen frocks and tarred trowsers we aremuch better entitled to St.
George's decoration than they.
Whether to admit Hercules among us or not, concerning this I longremained dubious: for though according to the Greek mythologies, thatantique Crockett and Kit Carson--that brawny doer of rejoicing gooddeeds, was swallowed down and thrown up by a whale; still, whetherthat strictly makes a whaleman of him, that might be mooted.
Itnowhere appears that he ever actually harpooned his fish, unless,indeed, from the inside.
Nevertheless, he may be deemed a sort ofinvoluntary whaleman; at any rate the whale caught him, if he did notthe whale.
I claim him for one of our clan.
But, by the best contradictory authorities, this Grecian story ofHercules and the whale is considered to be derived from the stillmore ancient Hebrew story of Jonah and the whale; and vice versa;certainly they are very similar.
If I claim the demigod then, whynot the prophet?Nor do heroes, saints, demigods, and prophets alone comprise thewhole roll of our order.
Our grand master is still to be named; forlike royal kings of old times, we find the head waters of ourfraternity in nothing short of the great gods themselves.
Thatwondrous oriental story is now to be rehearsed from the Shaster,which gives us the dread Vishnoo, one of the three persons in thegodhead of the Hindoos; gives us this divine Vishnoo himself for ourLord;--Vishnoo, who, by the first of his ten earthly incarnations,has for ever set apart and sanctified the whale.
When Brahma, or theGod of Gods, saith the Shaster, resolved to recreate the world afterone of its periodical dissolutions, he gave birth to Vishnoo, topreside over the work; but the Vedas, or mystical books, whoseperusal would seem to have been indispensable to Vishnoo beforebeginning the creation, and which therefore must have containedsomething in the shape of practical hints to young architects, theseVedas were lying at the bottom of the waters; so Vishnoo becameincarnate in a whale, and sounding down in him to the uttermostdepths, rescued the sacred volumes.
Was not this Vishnoo a whaleman,then? even as a man who rides a horse is called a horseman?Perseus, St.
George, Hercules, Jonah, and Vishnoo! there's amember-roll for you! What club but the whaleman's can head off likethat?Jonah Historically Regarded.
Reference was made to the historical story of Jonah and the whale inthe preceding chapter.
Now some Nantucketers rather distrust thishistorical story of Jonah and the whale.
But then there were somesceptical Greeks and Romans, who, standing out from the orthodoxpagans of their times, equally doubted the story of Hercules and thewhale, and Arion and the dolphin; and yet their doubting thosetraditions did not make those traditions one whit the less facts, forall that.
One old Sag-Harbor whaleman's chief reason for questioning the Hebrewstory was this:--He had one of those quaint old-fashioned Bibles,embellished with curious, unscientific plates; one of whichrepresented Jonah's whale with two spouts in his head--a peculiarityonly true with respect to a species of the Leviathan (the RightWhale, and the varieties of that order), concerning which thefishermen have this saying, "A penny roll would choke him"; hisswallow is so very small.
But, to this, Bishop Jebb's anticipativeanswer is ready.
It is not necessary, hints the Bishop, that weconsider Jonah as tombed in the whale's belly, but as temporarilylodged in some part of his mouth.
And this seems reasonable enoughin the good Bishop.
For truly, the Right Whale's mouth wouldaccommodate a couple of whist-tables, and comfortably seat all theplayers.
Possibly, too, Jonah might have ensconced himself in ahollow tooth; but, on second thoughts, the Right Whale is toothless.
Another reason which Sag-Harbor (he went by that name) urged for hiswant of faith in this matter of the prophet, was something obscurelyin reference to his incarcerated body and the whale's gastric juices.
But this objection likewise falls to the ground, because a Germanexegetist supposes that Jonah must have taken refuge in the floatingbody of a DEAD whale--even as the French soldiers in the Russiancampaign turned their dead horses into tents, and crawled into them.
Besides, it has been divined by other continental commentators, thatwhen Jonah was thrown overboard from the Joppa ship, he straightwayeffected his escape to another vessel near by, some vessel with awhale for a figure-head; and, I would add, possibly called "TheWhale," as some craft are nowadays christened the "Shark," the"Gull," the "Eagle.
" Nor have there been wanting learned exegetistswho have opined that the whale mentioned in the book of Jonah merelymeant a life-preserver--an inflated bag of wind--which the endangeredprophet swam to, and so was saved from a watery doom.
PoorSag-Harbor, therefore, seems worsted all round.
But he had stillanother reason for his want of faith.
It was this, if I rememberright: Jonah was swallowed by the whale in the Mediterranean Sea, andafter three days he was vomited up somewhere within three days'journey of Nineveh, a city on the Tigris, very much more than threedays' journey across from the nearest point of the Mediterraneancoast.
How is that?But was there no other way for the whale to land the prophet withinthat short distance of Nineveh? Yes.
He might have carried himround by the way of the Cape of Good Hope.
But not to speak of thepassage through the whole length of the Mediterranean, and anotherpassage up the Persian Gulf and Red Sea, such a supposition wouldinvolve the complete circumnavigation of all Africa in three days,not to speak of the Tigris waters, near the site of Nineveh, beingtoo shallow for any whale to swim in.
Besides, this idea of Jonah'sweathering the Cape of Good Hope at so early a day would wrest thehonour of the discovery of that great headland from Bartholomew Diaz,its reputed discoverer, and so make modern history a liar.
But all these foolish arguments of old Sag-Harbor only evinced hisfoolish pride of reason--a thing still more reprehensible in him,seeing that he had but little learning except what he had picked upfrom the sun and the sea.
I say it only shows his foolish, impiouspride, and abominable, devilish rebellion against the reverendclergy.
For by a Portuguese Catholic priest, this very idea ofJonah's going to Nineveh via the Cape of Good Hope was advanced as asignal magnification of the general miracle.
And so it was.
Besides, to this day, the highly enlightened Turks devoutly believein the historical story of Jonah.
And some three centuries ago, anEnglish traveller in old Harris's Voyages, speaks of a Turkish Mosquebuilt in honour of Jonah, in which Mosque was a miraculous lamp thatburnt without any oil.
Pitchpoling.
To make them run easily and swiftly, the axles of carriages areanointed; and for much the same purpose, some whalers perform ananalogous operation upon their boat; they grease the bottom.
Nor isit to be doubted that as such a procedure can do no harm, it maypossibly be of no contemptible advantage; considering that oil andwater are hostile; that oil is a sliding thing, and that the objectin view is to make the boat slide bravely.
Queequeg believedstrongly in anointing his boat, and one morning not long after theGerman ship Jungfrau disappeared, took more than customary pains inthat occupation; crawling under its bottom, where it hung over theside, and rubbing in the unctuousness as though diligently seeking toinsure a crop of hair from the craft's bald keel.
He seemed to beworking in obedience to some particular presentiment.
Nor did itremain unwarranted by the event.
Towards noon whales were raised; but so soon as the ship sailed downto them, they turned and fled with swift precipitancy; a disorderedflight, as of Cleopatra's barges from Actium.
Nevertheless, the boats pursued, and Stubb's was foremost.
By greatexertion, Tashtego at last succeeded in planting one iron; but thestricken whale, without at all sounding, still continued hishorizontal flight, with added fleetness.
Such unintermittedstrainings upon the planted iron must sooner or later inevitablyextract it.
It became imperative to lance the flying whale, or becontent to lose him.
But to haul the boat up to his flank wasimpossible, he swam so fast and furious.
What then remained?Of all the wondrous devices and dexterities, the sleights of hand andcountless subtleties, to which the veteran whaleman is so oftenforced, none exceed that fine manoeuvre with the lance calledpitchpoling.
Small sword, or broad sword, in all its exercisesboasts nothing like it.
It is only indispensable with an inveteraterunning whale; its grand fact and feature is the wonderful distanceto which the long lance is accurately darted from a violentlyrocking, jerking boat, under extreme headway.
Steel and woodincluded, the entire spear is some ten or twelve feet in length; thestaff is much slighter than that of the harpoon, and also of alighter material--pine.
It is furnished with a small rope called awarp, of considerable length, by which it can be hauled back to thehand after darting.
But before going further, it is important to mention here, thatthough the harpoon may be pitchpoled in the same way with the lance,yet it is seldom done; and when done, is still less frequentlysuccessful, on account of the greater weight and inferior length ofthe harpoon as compared with the lance, which in effect becomeserious drawbacks.
As a general thing, therefore, you must firstget fast to a whale, before any pitchpoling comes into play.
Look now at Stubb; a man who from his humorous, deliberate coolnessand equanimity in the direst emergencies, was specially qualified toexcel in pitchpoling.
Look at him; he stands upright in the tossedbow of the flying boat; wrapt in fleecy foam, the towing whale isforty feet ahead.
Handling the long lance lightly, glancing twice orthrice along its length to see if it be exactly straight, Stubbwhistlingly gathers up the coil of the warp in one hand, so as tosecure its free end in his grasp, leaving the rest unobstructed.
Then holding the lance full before his waistband's middle, he levelsit at the whale; when, covering him with it, he steadily depressesthe butt-end in his hand, thereby elevating the point till the weaponstands fairly balanced upon his palm, fifteen feet in the air.
Heminds you somewhat of a juggler, balancing a long staff on his chin.
Next moment with a rapid, nameless impulse, in a superb lofty arch thebright steel spans the foaming distance, and quivers in the life spotof the whale.
Instead of sparkling water, he now spouts red blood.
"That drove the spigot out of him!" cried Stubb.
"'Tis July'simmortal Fourth; all fountains must run wine today! Would now, itwere old Orleans whiskey, or old Ohio, or unspeakable oldMonongahela! Then, Tashtego, lad, I'd have ye hold a canakin to thejet, and we'd drink round it! Yea, verily, hearts alive, we'd brewchoice punch in the spread of his spout-hole there, and from thatlive punch-bowl quaff the living stuff.
"Again and again to such gamesome talk, the dexterous dart isrepeated, the spear returning to its master like a greyhound held inskilful leash.
The agonized whale goes into his flurry; the tow-lineis slackened, and the pitchpoler dropping astern, folds his hands,and mutely watches the monster die.
The Fountain.
That for six thousand years--and no one knows how many millions ofages before--the great whales should have been spouting all over thesea, and sprinkling and mistifying the gardens of the deep, as withso many sprinkling or mistifying pots; and that for some centuriesback, thousands of hunters should have been close by the fountain ofthe whale, watching these sprinklings and spoutings--that all thisshould be, and yet, that down to this blessed minute (fifteen and aquarter minutes past one o'clock P.
M.
of this sixteenth day ofDecember, A.
D.
1851), it should still remain a problem, whether thesespoutings are, after all, really water, or nothing but vapour--this issurely a noteworthy thing.
Let us, then, look at this matter, along with some interesting itemscontingent.
Every one knows that by the peculiar cunning of theirgills, the finny tribes in general breathe the air which at all timesis combined with the element in which they swim; hence, a herring ora cod might live a century, and never once raise its head above thesurface.
But owing to his marked internal structure which gives himregular lungs, like a human being's, the whale can only live byinhaling the disengaged air in the open atmosphere.
Wherefore thenecessity for his periodical visits to the upper world.
But hecannot in any degree breathe through his mouth, for, in his ordinaryattitude, the Sperm Whale's mouth is buried at least eight feetbeneath the surface; and what is still more, his windpipe has noconnexion with his mouth.
No, he breathes through his spiraclealone; and this is on the top of his head.
If I say, that in any creature breathing is only a functionindispensable to vitality, inasmuch as it withdraws from the air acertain element, which being subsequently brought into contact withthe blood imparts to the blood its vivifying principle, I do notthink I shall err; though I may possibly use some superfluousscientific words.
Assume it, and it follows that if all the blood ina man could be aerated with one breath, he might then seal up hisnostrils and not fetch another for a considerable time.
That is tosay, he would then live without breathing.
Anomalous as it may seem,this is precisely the case with the whale, who systematically lives,by intervals, his full hour and more (when at the bottom) withoutdrawing a single breath, or so much as in any way inhaling a particleof air; for, remember, he has no gills.
How is this? Between hisribs and on each side of his spine he is supplied with a remarkableinvolved Cretan labyrinth of vermicelli-like vessels, which vessels,when he quits the surface, are completely distended with oxygenatedblood.
So that for an hour or more, a thousand fathoms in the sea,he carries a surplus stock of vitality in him, just as the camelcrossing the waterless desert carries a surplus supply of drink forfuture use in its four supplementary stomachs.
The anatomical factof this labyrinth is indisputable; and that the supposition foundedupon it is reasonable and true, seems the more cogent to me, when Iconsider the otherwise inexplicable obstinacy of that leviathan inHAVING HIS SPOUTINGS OUT, as the fishermen phrase it.
This is what Imean.
If unmolested, upon rising to the surface, the Sperm Whalewill continue there for a period of time exactly uniform with all hisother unmolested risings.
Say he stays eleven minutes, and jetsseventy times, that is, respires seventy breaths; then whenever herises again, he will be sure to have his seventy breaths over again,to a minute.
Now, if after he fetches a few breaths you alarm him,so that he sounds, he will be always dodging up again to make goodhis regular allowance of air.
And not till those seventy breaths aretold, will he finally go down to stay out his full term below.
Remark, however, that in different individuals these rates aredifferent; but in any one they are alike.
Now, why should the whalethus insist upon having his spoutings out, unless it be to replenishhis reservoir of air, ere descending for good? How obvious is it,too, that this necessity for the whale's rising exposes him to allthe fatal hazards of the chase.
For not by hook or by net couldthis vast leviathan be caught, when sailing a thousand fathomsbeneath the sunlight.
Not so much thy skill, then, O hunter, as thegreat necessities that strike the victory to thee!In man, breathing is incessantly going on--one breath only servingfor two or three pulsations; so that whatever other business he hasto attend to, waking or sleeping, breathe he must, or die he will.
But the Sperm Whale only breathes about one seventh or Sunday of histime.
It has been said that the whale only breathes through his spout-hole;if it could truthfully be added that his spouts are mixed with water,then I opine we should be furnished with the reason why his sense ofsmell seems obliterated in him; for the only thing about him that atall answers to his nose is that identical spout-hole; and being soclogged with two elements, it could not be expected to have the powerof smelling.
But owing to the mystery of the spout--whether it bewater or whether it be vapour--no absolute certainty can as yet bearrived at on this head.
Sure it is, nevertheless, that the SpermWhale has no proper olfactories.
But what does he want of them? Noroses, no violets, no Cologne-water in the sea.
Furthermore, as his windpipe solely opens into the tube of hisspouting canal, and as that long canal--like the grand Erie Canal--isfurnished with a sort of locks (that open and shut) for the downwardretention of air or the upward exclusion of water, therefore thewhale has no voice; unless you insult him by saying, that when he sostrangely rumbles, he talks through his nose.
But then again, whathas the whale to say? Seldom have I known any profound being thathad anything to say to this world, unless forced to stammer outsomething by way of getting a living.
Oh! happy that the world issuch an excellent listener!Now, the spouting canal of the Sperm Whale, chiefly intended as it isfor the conveyance of air, and for several feet laid along,horizontally, just beneath the upper surface of his head, and alittle to one side; this curious canal is very much like a gas-pipelaid down in a city on one side of a street.
But the questionreturns whether this gas-pipe is also a water-pipe; in other words,whether the spout of the Sperm Whale is the mere vapour of the exhaledbreath, or whether that exhaled breath is mixed with water taken inat the mouth, and discharged through the spiracle.
It is certainthat the mouth indirectly communicates with the spouting canal; butit cannot be proved that this is for the purpose of discharging waterthrough the spiracle.
Because the greatest necessity for so doingwould seem to be, when in feeding he accidentally takes in water.
But the Sperm Whale's food is far beneath the surface, and there hecannot spout even if he would.
Besides, if you regard him veryclosely, and time him with your watch, you will find that whenunmolested, there is an undeviating rhyme between the periods of hisjets and the ordinary periods of respiration.
But why pester one with all this reasoning on the subject? Speakout! You have seen him spout; then declare what the spout is; canyou not tell water from air? My dear sir, in this world it is not soeasy to settle these plain things.
I have ever found your plainthings the knottiest of all.
And as for this whale spout, you mightalmost stand in it, and yet be undecided as to what it is precisely.
The central body of it is hidden in the snowy sparkling mistenveloping it; and how can you certainly tell whether any water fallsfrom it, when, always, when you are close enough to a whale to get aclose view of his spout, he is in a prodigious commotion, the watercascading all around him.
And if at such times you should think thatyou really perceived drops of moisture in the spout, how do you knowthat they are not merely condensed from its vapour; or how do you knowthat they are not those identical drops superficially lodged in thespout-hole fissure, which is countersunk into the summit of thewhale's head? For even when tranquilly swimming through the mid-daysea in a calm, with his elevated hump sun-dried as a dromedary's inthe desert; even then, the whale always carries a small basin ofwater on his head, as under a blazing sun you will sometimes see acavity in a rock filled up with rain.
Nor is it at all prudent for the hunter to be over curious touchingthe precise nature of the whale spout.
It will not do for him to bepeering into it, and putting his face in it.
You cannot go with yourpitcher to this fountain and fill it, and bring it away.
For evenwhen coming into slight contact with the outer, vapoury shreds of thejet, which will often happen, your skin will feverishly smart, fromthe acridness of the thing so touching it.
And I know one, whocoming into still closer contact with the spout, whether with somescientific object in view, or otherwise, I cannot say, the skinpeeled off from his cheek and arm.
Wherefore, among whalemen, thespout is deemed poisonous; they try to evade it.
Another thing; Ihave heard it said, and I do not much doubt it, that if the jet isfairly spouted into your eyes, it will blind you.
The wisest thingthe investigator can do then, it seems to me, is to let this deadlyspout alone.
Still, we can hypothesize, even if we cannot prove and establish.
Myhypothesis is this: that the spout is nothing but mist.
And besidesother reasons, to this conclusion I am impelled, by considerationstouching the great inherent dignity and sublimity of the Sperm Whale;I account him no common, shallow being, inasmuch as it is anundisputed fact that he is never found on soundings, or near shores;all other whales sometimes are.
He is both ponderous and profound.
And I am convinced that from the heads of all ponderous profoundbeings, such as Plato, Pyrrho, the Devil, Jupiter, Dante, and so on,there always goes up a certain semi-visible steam, while in the actof thinking deep thoughts.
While composing a little treatise onEternity, I had the curiosity to place a mirror before me; and erelong saw reflected there, a curious involved worming and undulationin the atmosphere over my head.
The invariable moisture of my hair,while plunged in deep thought, after six cups of hot tea in my thinshingled attic, of an August noon; this seems an additional argumentfor the above supposition.
And how nobly it raises our conceit of the mighty, misty monster, tobehold him solemnly sailing through a calm tropical sea; his vast,mild head overhung by a canopy of vapour, engendered by hisincommunicable contemplations, and that vapour--as you will sometimessee it--glorified by a rainbow, as if Heaven itself had put its sealupon his thoughts.
For, d'ye see, rainbows do not visit the clearair; they only irradiate vapour.
And so, through all the thick mistsof the dim doubts in my mind, divine intuitions now and then shoot,enkindling my fog with a heavenly ray.
And for this I thank God; forall have doubts; many deny; but doubts or denials, few along withthem, have intuitions.
Doubts of all things earthly, and intuitionsof some things heavenly; this combination makes neither believer norinfidel, but makes a man who regards them both with equal eye.
The Tail.
Other poets have warbled the praises of the soft eye of the antelope,and the lovely plumage of the bird that never alights; lesscelestial, I celebrate a tail.
Reckoning the largest sized Sperm Whale's tail to begin at that pointof the trunk where it tapers to about the girth of a man, itcomprises upon its upper surface alone, an area of at least fiftysquare feet.
The compact round body of its root expands into twobroad, firm, flat palms or flukes, gradually shoaling away to lessthan an inch in thickness.
At the crotch or junction, these flukesslightly overlap, then sideways recede from each other like wings,leaving a wide vacancy between.
In no living thing are the lines ofbeauty more exquisitely defined than in the crescentic borders ofthese flukes.
At its utmost expansion in the full grown whale, thetail will considerably exceed twenty feet across.
The entire member seems a dense webbed bed of welded sinews; but cutinto it, and you find that three distinct strata compose it:--upper,middle, and lower.
The fibres in the upper and lower layers, arelong and horizontal; those of the middle one, very short, and runningcrosswise between the outside layers.
This triune structure, as muchas anything else, imparts power to the tail.
To the student of oldRoman walls, the middle layer will furnish a curious parallel to thethin course of tiles always alternating with the stone in thosewonderful relics of the antique, and which undoubtedly contribute somuch to the great strength of the masonry.
But as if this vast local power in the tendinous tail were notenough, the whole bulk of the leviathan is knit over with a warp andwoof of muscular fibres and filaments, which passing on either sidethe loins and running down into the flukes, insensibly blend withthem, and largely contribute to their might; so that in the tail theconfluent measureless force of the whole whale seems concentrated toa point.
Could annihilation occur to matter, this were the thing todo it.
Nor does this--its amazing strength, at all tend to cripple thegraceful flexion of its motions; where infantileness of easeundulates through a Titanism of power.
On the contrary, thosemotions derive their most appalling beauty from it.
Real strengthnever impairs beauty or harmony, but it often bestows it; and ineverything imposingly beautiful, strength has much to do with themagic.
Take away the tied tendons that all over seem bursting fromthe marble in the carved Hercules, and its charm would be gone.
Asdevout Eckerman lifted the linen sheet from the naked corpse ofGoethe, he was overwhelmed with the massive chest of the man, thatseemed as a Roman triumphal arch.
When Angelo paints even God theFather in human form, mark what robustness is there.
And whateverthey may reveal of the divine love in the Son, the soft, curled,hermaphroditical Italian pictures, in which his idea has been mostsuccessfully embodied; these pictures, so destitute as they are ofall brawniness, hint nothing of any power, but the mere negative,feminine one of submission and endurance, which on all hands it isconceded, form the peculiar practical virtues of his teachings.
Such is the subtle elasticity of the organ I treat of, that whetherwielded in sport, or in earnest, or in anger, whatever be the mood itbe in, its flexions are invariably marked by exceeding grace.
Therein no fairy's arm can transcend it.
Five great motions are peculiar to it.
First, when used as a fin forprogression; Second, when used as a mace in battle; Third, insweeping; Fourth, in lobtailing; Fifth, in peaking flukes.
First: Being horizontal in its position, the Leviathan's tail acts ina different manner from the tails of all other sea creatures.
Itnever wriggles.
In man or fish, wriggling is a sign of inferiority.
To the whale, his tail is the sole means of propulsion.
Scroll-wisecoiled forwards beneath the body, and then rapidly sprung backwards,it is this which gives that singular darting, leaping motion to themonster when furiously swimming.
His side-fins only serve to steerby.
Second: It is a little significant, that while one sperm whale onlyfights another sperm whale with his head and jaw, nevertheless, inhis conflicts with man, he chiefly and contemptuously uses his tail.
In striking at a boat, he swiftly curves away his flukes from it, andthe blow is only inflicted by the recoil.
If it be made in theunobstructed air, especially if it descend to its mark, the stroke isthen simply irresistible.
No ribs of man or boat can withstand it.
Your only salvation lies in eluding it; but if it comes sidewaysthrough the opposing water, then partly owing to the light buoyancyof the whale boat, and the elasticity of its materials, a crackedrib or a dashed plank or two, a sort of stitch in the side, isgenerally the most serious result.
These submerged side blows are sooften received in the fishery, that they are accounted mere child'splay.
Some one strips off a frock, and the hole is stopped.
Third: I cannot demonstrate it, but it seems to me, that in the whalethe sense of touch is concentrated in the tail; for in this respectthere is a delicacy in it only equalled by the daintiness of theelephant's trunk.
This delicacy is chiefly evinced in the action ofsweeping, when in maidenly gentleness the whale with a certain softslowness moves his immense flukes from side to side upon the surface ofthe sea; and if he feel but a sailor's whisker, woe to that sailor,whiskers and all.
What tenderness there is in that preliminarytouch! Had this tail any prehensile power, I should straightwaybethink me of Darmonodes' elephant that so frequented theflower-market, and with low salutations presented nosegays todamsels, and then caressed their zones.
On more accounts than one, apity it is that the whale does not possess this prehensile virtue inhis tail; for I have heard of yet another elephant, that when woundedin the fight, curved round his trunk and extracted the dart.
Fourth: Stealing unawares upon the whale in the fancied security ofthe middle of solitary seas, you find him unbent from the vastcorpulence of his dignity, and kitten-like, he plays on the ocean asif it were a hearth.
But still you see his power in his play.
Thebroad palms of his tail are flirted high into the air; then smitingthe surface, the thunderous concussion resounds for miles.
You wouldalmost think a great gun had been discharged; and if you noticed thelight wreath of vapour from the spiracle at his other extremity, youwould think that that was the smoke from the touch-hole.
Fifth: As in the ordinary floating posture of the leviathan theflukes lie considerably below the level of his back, they are thencompletely out of sight beneath the surface; but when he is about toplunge into the deeps, his entire flukes with at least thirty feet ofhis body are tossed erect in the air, and so remain vibrating amoment, till they downwards shoot out of view.
Excepting the sublimeBREACH--somewhere else to be described--this peaking of the whale'sflukes is perhaps the grandest sight to be seen in all animatednature.
Out of the bottomless profundities the gigantic tail seemsspasmodically snatching at the highest heaven.
So in dreams, have Iseen majestic Satan thrusting forth his tormented colossal claw fromthe flame Baltic of Hell.
But in gazing at such scenes, it is all inall what mood you are in; if in the Dantean, the devils will occur toyou; if in that of Isaiah, the archangels.
Standing at the mast-headof my ship during a sunrise that crimsoned sky and sea, I once saw alarge herd of whales in the east, all heading towards the sun, andfor a moment vibrating in concert with peaked flukes.
As it seemedto me at the time, such a grand embodiment of adoration of the godswas never beheld, even in Persia, the home of the fire worshippers.
As Ptolemy Philopater testified of the African elephant, I thentestified of the whale, pronouncing him the most devout of allbeings.
For according to King Juba, the military elephants ofantiquity often hailed the morning with their trunks uplifted in theprofoundest silence.
The chance comparison in this chapter, between the whale and theelephant, so far as some aspects of the tail of the one and the trunkof the other are concerned, should not tend to place those twoopposite organs on an equality, much less the creatures to which theyrespectively belong.
For as the mightiest elephant is but a terrierto Leviathan, so, compared with Leviathan's tail, his trunk is butthe stalk of a lily.
The most direful blow from the elephant's trunkwere as the playful tap of a fan, compared with the measureless crushand crash of the sperm whale's ponderous flukes, which in repeatedinstances have one after the other hurled entire boats with all theiroars and crews into the air, very much as an Indian juggler tosseshis balls.
**Though all comparison in the way of general bulk between the whaleand the elephant is preposterous, inasmuch as in that particular theelephant stands in much the same respect to the whale that a dog doesto the elephant; nevertheless, there are not wanting some points ofcurious similitude; among these is the spout.
It is well known thatthe elephant will often draw up water or dust in his trunk, and thenelevating it, jet it forth in a stream.
The more I consider this mighty tail, the more do I deplore myinability to express it.
At times there are gestures in it, which,though they would well grace the hand of man, remain whollyinexplicable.
In an extensive herd, so remarkable, occasionally, arethese mystic gestures, that I have heard hunters who have declaredthem akin to Free-Mason signs and symbols; that the whale, indeed, bythese methods intelligently conversed with the world.
Nor are therewanting other motions of the whale in his general body, full ofstrangeness, and unaccountable to his most experienced assailant.
Dissect him how I may, then, I but go skin deep; I know him not,and never will.
But if I know not even the tail of this whale, howunderstand his head? much more, how comprehend his face, when face hehas none? Thou shalt see my back parts, my tail, he seems to say,but my face shall not be seen.
But I cannot completely make out hisback parts; and hint what he will about his face, I say again he hasno face.
The Grand Armada.
The long and narrow peninsula of Malacca, extending south-eastwardfrom the territories of Birmah, forms the most southerly point of allAsia.
In a continuous line from that peninsula stretch the longislands of Sumatra, Java, Bally, and Timor; which, with many others,form a vast mole, or rampart, lengthwise connecting Asia withAustralia, and dividing the long unbroken Indian ocean from thethickly studded oriental archipelagoes.
This rampart is pierced byseveral sally-ports for the convenience of ships and whales;conspicuous among which are the straits of Sunda and Malacca.
By thestraits of Sunda, chiefly, vessels bound to China from the west,emerge into the China seas.
Those narrow straits of Sunda divide Sumatra from Java; and standingmidway in that vast rampart of islands, buttressed by that bold greenpromontory, known to seamen as Java Head; they not a littlecorrespond to the central gateway opening into some vast walledempire: and considering the inexhaustible wealth of spices, andsilks, and jewels, and gold, and ivory, with which the thousandislands of that oriental sea are enriched, it seems a significantprovision of nature, that such treasures, by the very formation ofthe land, should at least bear the appearance, however ineffectual,of being guarded from the all-grasping western world.
The shores ofthe Straits of Sunda are unsupplied with those domineering fortresseswhich guard the entrances to the Mediterranean, the Baltic, and thePropontis.
Unlike the Danes, these Orientals do not demand theobsequious homage of lowered top-sails from the endless procession ofships before the wind, which for centuries past, by night and by day,have passed between the islands of Sumatra and Java, freighted withthe costliest cargoes of the east.
But while they freely waive aceremonial like this, they do by no means renounce their claim tomore solid tribute.
Time out of mind the piratical proas of the Malays, lurking among thelow shaded coves and islets of Sumatra, have sallied out upon thevessels sailing through the straits, fiercely demanding tribute atthe point of their spears.
Though by the repeated bloodychastisements they have received at the hands of European cruisers,the audacity of these corsairs has of late been somewhat repressed;yet, even at the present day, we occasionally hear of English andAmerican vessels, which, in those waters, have been remorselesslyboarded and pillaged.
With a fair, fresh wind, the Pequod was now drawing nigh to thesestraits; Ahab purposing to pass through them into the Javan sea, andthence, cruising northwards, over waters known to be frequented hereand there by the Sperm Whale, sweep inshore by the PhilippineIslands, and gain the far coast of Japan, in time for the greatwhaling season there.
By these means, the circumnavigating Pequodwould sweep almost all the known Sperm Whale cruising grounds of theworld, previous to descending upon the Line in the Pacific; whereAhab, though everywhere else foiled in his pursuit, firmly countedupon giving battle to Moby Dick, in the sea he was most known tofrequent; and at a season when he might most reasonably be presumedto be haunting it.
But how now? in this zoned quest, does Ahab touch no land? does hiscrew drink air? Surely, he will stop for water.
Nay.
For a longtime, now, the circus-running sun has raced within his fiery ring,and needs no sustenance but what's in himself.
So Ahab.
Mark this,too, in the whaler.
While other hulls are loaded down with alienstuff, to be transferred to foreign wharves; the world-wanderingwhale-ship carries no cargo but herself and crew, their weapons andtheir wants.
She has a whole lake's contents bottled in her amplehold.
She is ballasted with utilities; not altogether with unusablepig-lead and kentledge.
She carries years' water in her.
Clear oldprime Nantucket water; which, when three years afloat, theNantucketer, in the Pacific, prefers to drink before the brackishfluid, but yesterday rafted off in casks, from the Peruvian or Indianstreams.
Hence it is, that, while other ships may have gone to Chinafrom New York, and back again, touching at a score of ports, thewhale-ship, in all that interval, may not have sighted one grain ofsoil; her crew having seen no man but floating seamen likethemselves.
So that did you carry them the news that another floodhad come; they would only answer--"Well, boys, here's the ark!"Now, as many Sperm Whales had been captured off the western coast ofJava, in the near vicinity of the Straits of Sunda; indeed, as mostof the ground, roundabout, was generally recognised by the fishermenas an excellent spot for cruising; therefore, as the Pequod gainedmore and more upon Java Head, the look-outs were repeatedly hailed,and admonished to keep wide awake.
But though the green palmy cliffsof the land soon loomed on the starboard bow, and with delightednostrils the fresh cinnamon was snuffed in the air, yet not a singlejet was descried.
Almost renouncing all thought of falling in withany game hereabouts, the ship had well nigh entered the straits, whenthe customary cheering cry was heard from aloft, and ere long aspectacle of singular magnificence saluted us.
But here be it premised, that owing to the unwearied activity withwhich of late they have been hunted over all four oceans, the SpermWhales, instead of almost invariably sailing in small detachedcompanies, as in former times, are now frequently met with inextensive herds, sometimes embracing so great a multitude, that itwould almost seem as if numerous nations of them had sworn solemnleague and covenant for mutual assistance and protection.
To thisaggregation of the Sperm Whale into such immense caravans, may beimputed the circumstance that even in the best cruising grounds, youmay now sometimes sail for weeks and months together, without beinggreeted by a single spout; and then be suddenly saluted by whatsometimes seems thousands on thousands.
Broad on both bows, at the distance of some two or three miles, andforming a great semicircle, embracing one half of the level horizon,a continuous chain of whale-jets were up-playing and sparkling in thenoon-day air.
Unlike the straight perpendicular twin-jets of theRight Whale, which, dividing at top, fall over in two branches, likethe cleft drooping boughs of a willow, the single forward-slantingspout of the Sperm Whale presents a thick curled bush of white mist,continually rising and falling away to leeward.
Seen from the Pequod's deck, then, as she would rise on a high hillof the sea, this host of vapoury spouts, individually curling up intothe air, and beheld through a blending atmosphere of bluish haze,showed like the thousand cheerful chimneys of some dense metropolis,descried of a balmy autumnal morning, by some horseman on a height.
As marching armies approaching an unfriendly defile in the mountains,accelerate their march, all eagerness to place that perilous passagein their rear, and once more expand in comparative security upon theplain; even so did this vast fleet of whales now seem hurryingforward through the straits; gradually contracting the wings of theirsemicircle, and swimming on, in one solid, but still crescenticcentre.
Crowding all sail the Pequod pressed after them; the harpooneershandling their weapons, and loudly cheering from the heads of theiryet suspended boats.
If the wind only held, little doubt had they,that chased through these Straits of Sunda, the vast host would onlydeploy into the Oriental seas to witness the capture of not a few oftheir number.
And who could tell whether, in that congregatedcaravan, Moby Dick himself might not temporarily be swimming, likethe worshipped white-elephant in the coronation procession of theSiamese! So with stun-sail piled on stun-sail, we sailed along,driving these leviathans before us; when, of a sudden, the voice ofTashtego was heard, loudly directing attention to something in ourwake.
Corresponding to the crescent in our van, we beheld another in ourrear.
It seemed formed of detached white vapours, rising and fallingsomething like the spouts of the whales; only they did not socompletely come and go; for they constantly hovered, without finallydisappearing.
Levelling his glass at this sight, Ahab quicklyrevolved in his pivot-hole, crying, "Aloft there, and rig whips andbuckets to wet the sails;--Malays, sir, and after us!"As if too long lurking behind the headlands, till the Pequod shouldfairly have entered the straits, these rascally Asiatics were now inhot pursuit, to make up for their over-cautious delay.
But when theswift Pequod, with a fresh leading wind, was herself in hot chase;how very kind of these tawny philanthropists to assist in speedingher on to her own chosen pursuit,--mere riding-whips and rowels toher, that they were.
As with glass under arm, Ahab to-and-fro pacedthe deck; in his forward turn beholding the monsters he chased, andin the after one the bloodthirsty pirates chasing him; some suchfancy as the above seemed his.
And when he glanced upon the greenwalls of the watery defile in which the ship was then sailing, andbethought him that through that gate lay the route to his vengeance,and beheld, how that through that same gate he was now both chasingand being chased to his deadly end; and not only that, but a herd ofremorseless wild pirates and inhuman atheistical devils wereinfernally cheering him on with their curses;--when all theseconceits had passed through his brain, Ahab's brow was left gaunt andribbed, like the black sand beach after some stormy tide has beengnawing it, without being able to drag the firm thing from its place.
But thoughts like these troubled very few of the reckless crew; andwhen, after steadily dropping and dropping the pirates astern, thePequod at last shot by the vivid green Cockatoo Point on the Sumatraside, emerging at last upon the broad waters beyond; then, theharpooneers seemed more to grieve that the swift whales had beengaining upon the ship, than to rejoice that the ship had sovictoriously gained upon the Malays.
But still driving on in thewake of the whales, at length they seemed abating their speed;gradually the ship neared them; and the wind now dying away, word waspassed to spring to the boats.
But no sooner did the herd, by somepresumed wonderful instinct of the Sperm Whale, become notified ofthe three keels that were after them,--though as yet a mile in theirrear,--than they rallied again, and forming in close ranks andbattalions, so that their spouts all looked like flashing lines ofstacked bayonets, moved on with redoubled velocity.
Stripped to our shirts and drawers, we sprang to the white-ash, andafter several hours' pulling were almost disposed to renounce thechase, when a general pausing commotion among the whales gaveanimating token that they were now at last under the influence ofthat strange perplexity of inert irresolution, which, when thefishermen perceive it in the whale, they say he is gallied.
Thecompact martial columns in which they had been hitherto rapidly andsteadily swimming, were now broken up in one measureless rout; andlike King Porus' elephants in the Indian battle with Alexander, theyseemed going mad with consternation.
In all directions expanding invast irregular circles, and aimlessly swimming hither and thither, bytheir short thick spoutings, they plainly betrayed their distractionof panic.
This was still more strangely evinced by those of theirnumber, who, completely paralysed as it were, helplessly floated likewater-logged dismantled ships on the sea.
Had these Leviathans beenbut a flock of simple sheep, pursued over the pasture by three fiercewolves, they could not possibly have evinced such excessive dismay.
But this occasional timidity is characteristic of almost all herdingcreatures.
Though banding together in tens of thousands, thelion-maned buffaloes of the West have fled before a solitaryhorseman.
Witness, too, all human beings, how when herded togetherin the sheepfold of a theatre's pit, they will, at the slightestalarm of fire, rush helter-skelter for the outlets, crowding,trampling, jamming, and remorselessly dashing each other to death.
Best, therefore, withhold any amazement at the strangely galliedwhales before us, for there is no folly of the beasts of the earthwhich is not infinitely outdone by the madness of men.
Though many of the whales, as has been said, were in violent motion,yet it is to be observed that as a whole the herd neither advancednor retreated, but collectively remained in one place.
As iscustomary in those cases, the boats at once separated, each makingfor some one lone whale on the outskirts of the shoal.
In aboutthree minutes' time, Queequeg's harpoon was flung; the stricken fishdarted blinding spray in our faces, and then running away with us likelight, steered straight for the heart of the herd.
Though such amovement on the part of the whale struck under such circumstances, isin no wise unprecedented; and indeed is almost always more or lessanticipated; yet does it present one of the more perilousvicissitudes of the fishery.
For as the swift monster drags youdeeper and deeper into the frantic shoal, you bid adieu tocircumspect life and only exist in a delirious throb.
As, blind and deaf, the whale plunged forward, as if by sheer powerof speed to rid himself of the iron leech that had fastened to him;as we thus tore a white gash in the sea, on all sides menaced as weflew, by the crazed creatures to and fro rushing about us; our besetboat was like a ship mobbed by ice-isles in a tempest, and strivingto steer through their complicated channels and straits, knowing not atwhat moment it may be locked in and crushed.
But not a bit daunted, Queequeg steered us manfully; now sheering offfrom this monster directly across our route in advance; now edgingaway from that, whose colossal flukes were suspended overhead, whileall the time, Starbuck stood up in the bows, lance in hand, prickingout of our way whatever whales he could reach by short darts, forthere was no time to make long ones.
Nor were the oarsmen quiteidle, though their wonted duty was now altogether dispensed with.
They chiefly attended to the shouting part of the business.
"Out ofthe way, Commodore!" cried one, to a great dromedary that of a suddenrose bodily to the surface, and for an instant threatened to swampus.
"Hard down with your tail, there!" cried a second to another,which, close to our gunwale, seemed calmly cooling himself with hisown fan-like extremity.
All whaleboats carry certain curious contrivances, originallyinvented by the Nantucket Indians, called druggs.
Two thick squaresof wood of equal size are stoutly clenched together, so that theycross each other's grain at right angles; a line of considerablelength is then attached to the middle of this block, and the otherend of the line being looped, it can in a moment be fastened to aharpoon.
It is chiefly among gallied whales that this drugg is used.
For then, more whales are close round you than you can possiblychase at one time.
But sperm whales are not every day encountered;while you may, then, you must kill all you can.
And if you cannotkill them all at once, you must wing them, so that they can beafterwards killed at your leisure.
Hence it is, that at times likethese the drugg, comes into requisition.
Our boat was furnished withthree of them.
The first and second were successfully darted, and wesaw the whales staggeringly running off, fettered by the enormoussidelong resistance of the towing drugg.
They were cramped likemalefactors with the chain and ball.
But upon flinging the third, inthe act of tossing overboard the clumsy wooden block, it caught underone of the seats of the boat, and in an instant tore it out andcarried it away, dropping the oarsman in the boat's bottom as theseat slid from under him.
On both sides the sea came in at thewounded planks, but we stuffed two or three drawers and shirts in,and so stopped the leaks for the time.
It had been next to impossible to dart these drugged-harpoons, wereit not that as we advanced into the herd, our whale's way greatlydiminished; moreover, that as we went still further and further fromthe circumference of commotion, the direful disorders seemed waning.
So that when at last the jerking harpoon drew out, and the towingwhale sideways vanished; then, with the tapering force of his partingmomentum, we glided between two whales into the innermost heart ofthe shoal, as if from some mountain torrent we had slid into a serenevalley lake.
Here the storms in the roaring glens between theoutermost whales, were heard but not felt.
In this central expansethe sea presented that smooth satin-like surface, called a sleek,produced by the subtle moisture thrown off by the whale in his morequiet moods.
Yes, we were now in that enchanted calm which they saylurks at the heart of every commotion.
And still in the distracteddistance we beheld the tumults of the outer concentric circles, andsaw successive pods of whales, eight or ten in each, swiftly goinground and round, like multiplied spans of horses in a ring; and soclosely shoulder to shoulder, that a Titanic circus-rider mighteasily have over-arched the middle ones, and so have gone round ontheir backs.
Owing to the density of the crowd of reposing whales,more immediately surrounding the embayed axis of the herd, nopossible chance of escape was at present afforded us.
We must watchfor a breach in the living wall that hemmed us in; the wall that hadonly admitted us in order to shut us up.
Keeping at the centre ofthe lake, we were occasionally visited by small tame cows and calves;the women and children of this routed host.
Now, inclusive of the occasional wide intervals between the revolvingouter circles, and inclusive of the spaces between the various podsin any one of those circles, the entire area at this juncture,embraced by the whole multitude, must have contained at least two orthree square miles.
At any rate--though indeed such a test at such atime might be deceptive--spoutings might be discovered from our lowboat that seemed playing up almost from the rim of the horizon.
Imention this circumstance, because, as if the cows and calves hadbeen purposely locked up in this innermost fold; and as if the wideextent of the herd had hitherto prevented them from learning theprecise cause of its stopping; or, possibly, being so young,unsophisticated, and every way innocent and inexperienced; however itmay have been, these smaller whales--now and then visiting ourbecalmed boat from the margin of the lake--evinced a wondrousfearlessness and confidence, or else a still becharmed panic which itwas impossible not to marvel at.
Like household dogs they camesnuffling round us, right up to our gunwales, and touching them; tillit almost seemed that some spell had suddenly domesticated them.
Queequeg patted their foreheads; Starbuck scratched their backs withhis lance; but fearful of the consequences, for the time refrainedfrom darting it.
But far beneath this wondrous world upon the surface, another andstill stranger world met our eyes as we gazed over the side.
For,suspended in those watery vaults, floated the forms of the nursingmothers of the whales, and those that by their enormous girth seemedshortly to become mothers.
The lake, as I have hinted, was to aconsiderable depth exceedingly transparent; and as human infantswhile suckling will calmly and fixedly gaze away from the breast, asif leading two different lives at the time; and while yet drawingmortal nourishment, be still spiritually feasting upon some unearthlyreminiscence;--even so did the young of these whales seem looking uptowards us, but not at us, as if we were but a bit of Gulfweed intheir new-born sight.
Floating on their sides, the mothers alsoseemed quietly eyeing us.
One of these little infants, that fromcertain queer tokens seemed hardly a day old, might have measuredsome fourteen feet in length, and some six feet in girth.
He was alittle frisky; though as yet his body seemed scarce yet recoveredfrom that irksome position it had so lately occupied in the maternalreticule; where, tail to head, and all ready for the final spring,the unborn whale lies bent like a Tartar's bow.
The delicateside-fins, and the palms of his flukes, still freshly retained theplaited crumpled appearance of a baby's ears newly arrived fromforeign parts.
"Line! line!" cried Queequeg, looking over the gunwale; "him fast!him fast!--Who line him! Who struck?--Two whale; one big, onelittle!""What ails ye, man?" cried Starbuck.
"Look-e here," said Queequeg, pointing down.
As when the stricken whale, that from the tub has reeled out hundredsof fathoms of rope; as, after deep sounding, he floats up again, andshows the slackened curling line buoyantly rising and spirallingtowards the air; so now, Starbuck saw long coils of the umbilicalcord of Madame Leviathan, by which the young cub seemed stilltethered to its dam.
Not seldom in the rapid vicissitudes of thechase, this natural line, with the maternal end loose, becomesentangled with the hempen one, so that the cub is thereby trapped.
Some of the subtlest secrets of the seas seemed divulged to us inthis enchanted pond.
We saw young Leviathan amours in the deep.
**The sperm whale, as with all other species of the Leviathan, butunlike most other fish, breeds indifferently at all seasons; after agestation which may probably be set down at nine months, producingbut one at a time; though in some few known instances giving birth toan Esau and Jacob:--a contingency provided for in suckling by twoteats, curiously situated, one on each side of the anus; but thebreasts themselves extend upwards from that.
When by chance theseprecious parts in a nursing whale are cut by the hunter's lance, themother's pouring milk and blood rivallingly discolour the sea forrods.
The milk is very sweet and rich; it has been tasted by man; itmight do well with strawberries.
When overflowing with mutualesteem, the whales salute MORE HOMINUM.
And thus, though surrounded by circle upon circle of consternationsand affrights, did these inscrutable creatures at the centre freelyand fearlessly indulge in all peaceful concernments; yea, serenelyrevelled in dalliance and delight.
But even so, amid the tornadoedAtlantic of my being, do I myself still for ever centrally disport inmute calm; and while ponderous planets of unwaning woe revolve roundme, deep down and deep inland there I still bathe me in eternalmildness of joy.
Meanwhile, as we thus lay entranced, the occasional sudden franticspectacles in the distance evinced the activity of the other boats,still engaged in drugging the whales on the frontier of the host; orpossibly carrying on the war within the first circle, where abundanceof room and some convenient retreats were afforded them.
But thesight of the enraged drugged whales now and then blindly darting toand fro across the circles, was nothing to what at last met our eyes.
It is sometimes the custom when fast to a whale more than commonlypowerful and alert, to seek to hamstring him, as it were, bysundering or maiming his gigantic tail-tendon.
It is done by dartinga short-handled cutting-spade, to which is attached a rope forhauling it back again.
A whale wounded (as we afterwards learned) inthis part, but not effectually, as it seemed, had broken away fromthe boat, carrying along with him half of the harpoon line; and inthe extraordinary agony of the wound, he was now dashing among therevolving circles like the lone mounted desperado Arnold, at thebattle of Saratoga, carrying dismay wherever he went.
But agonizing as was the wound of this whale, and an appallingspectacle enough, any way; yet the peculiar horror with which heseemed to inspire the rest of the herd, was owing to a cause which atfirst the intervening distance obscured from us.
But at length weperceived that by one of the unimaginable accidents of the fishery,this whale had become entangled in the harpoon-line that he towed; hehad also run away with the cutting-spade in him; and while the freeend of the rope attached to that weapon, had permanently caught inthe coils of the harpoon-line round his tail, the cutting-spadeitself had worked loose from his flesh.
So that tormented tomadness, he was now churning through the water, violently flailingwith his flexible tail, and tossing the keen spade about him,wounding and murdering his own comrades.
This terrific object seemed to recall the whole herd from theirstationary fright.
First, the whales forming the margin of our lakebegan to crowd a little, and tumble against each other, as if liftedby half spent billows from afar; then the lake itself began faintlyto heave and swell; the submarine bridal-chambers and nurseriesvanished; in more and more contracting orbits the whales in the morecentral circles began to swim in thickening clusters.
Yes, the longcalm was departing.
A low advancing hum was soon heard; and thenlike to the tumultuous masses of block-ice when the great riverHudson breaks up in Spring, the entire host of whales came tumblingupon their inner centre, as if to pile themselves up in one commonmountain.
Instantly Starbuck and Queequeg changed places; Starbucktaking the stern.
"Oars! Oars!" he intensely whispered, seizing the helm--"gripe youroars, and clutch your souls, now! My God, men, stand by! Shove himoff, you Queequeg--the whale there!--prick him!--hit him! Standup--stand up, and stay so! Spring, men--pull, men; never mind theirbacks--scrape them!--scrape away!"The boat was now all but jammed between two vast black bulks, leavinga narrow Dardanelles between their long lengths.
But by desperateendeavor we at last shot into a temporary opening; then giving wayrapidly, and at the same time earnestly watching for another outlet.
After many similar hair-breadth escapes, we at last swiftly glidedinto what had just been one of the outer circles, but now crossed byrandom whales, all violently making for one centre.
This luckysalvation was cheaply purchased by the loss of Queequeg's hat, who,while standing in the bows to prick the fugitive whales, had his hattaken clean from his head by the air-eddy made by the sudden tossingof a pair of broad flukes close by.
Riotous and disordered as the universal commotion now was, it soonresolved itself into what seemed a systematic movement; for havingclumped together at last in one dense body, they then renewed theironward flight with augmented fleetness.
Further pursuit was useless;but the boats still lingered in their wake to pick up what druggedwhales might be dropped astern, and likewise to secure one whichFlask had killed and waifed.
The waif is a pennoned pole, two orthree of which are carried by every boat; and which, when additionalgame is at hand, are inserted upright into the floating body of adead whale, both to mark its place on the sea, and also as token ofprior possession, should the boats of any other ship draw near.
The result of this lowering was somewhat illustrative of thatsagacious saying in the Fishery,--the more whales the less fish.
Ofall the drugged whales only one was captured.
The rest contrived toescape for the time, but only to be taken, as will hereafter be seen,by some other craft than the Pequod.
Schools and Schoolmasters.
The previous chapter gave account of an immense body or herd of SpermWhales, and there was also then given the probable cause inducingthose vast aggregations.
Now, though such great bodies are at times encountered, yet, as musthave been seen, even at the present day, small detached bands areoccasionally observed, embracing from twenty to fifty individualseach.
Such bands are known as schools.
They generally are of twosorts; those composed almost entirely of females, and those musteringnone but young vigorous males, or bulls, as they are familiarlydesignated.
In cavalier attendance upon the school of females, you invariably seea male of full grown magnitude, but not old; who, upon any alarm,evinces his gallantry by falling in the rear and covering the flightof his ladies.
In truth, this gentleman is a luxurious Ottoman,swimming about over the watery world, surroundingly accompanied byall the solaces and endearments of the harem.
The contrast betweenthis Ottoman and his concubines is striking; because, while he isalways of the largest leviathanic proportions, the ladies, even atfull growth, are not more than one-third of the bulk of anaverage-sized male.
They are comparatively delicate, indeed; I daresay, not to exceed half a dozen yards round the waist.
Nevertheless,it cannot be denied, that upon the whole they are hereditarilyentitled to EMBONPOINT.
It is very curious to watch this harem and its lord in their indolentramblings.
Like fashionables, they are for ever on the move inleisurely search of variety.
You meet them on the Line in time forthe full flower of the Equatorial feeding season, having justreturned, perhaps, from spending the summer in the Northern seas, andso cheating summer of all unpleasant weariness and warmth.
By thetime they have lounged up and down the promenade of the Equatorawhile, they start for the Oriental waters in anticipation of thecool season there, and so evade the other excessive temperature ofthe year.
When serenely advancing on one of these journeys, if any strangesuspicious sights are seen, my lord whale keeps a wary eye on hisinteresting family.
Should any unwarrantably pert young Leviathancoming that way, presume to draw confidentially close to one of theladies, with what prodigious fury the Bashaw assails him, and chaseshim away! High times, indeed, if unprincipled young rakes like himare to be permitted to invade the sanctity of domestic bliss; thoughdo what the Bashaw will, he cannot keep the most notorious Lotharioout of his bed; for, alas! all fish bed in common.
As ashore, theladies often cause the most terrible duels among their rivaladmirers; just so with the whales, who sometimes come to deadlybattle, and all for love.
They fence with their long lower jaws,sometimes locking them together, and so striving for the supremacylike elks that warringly interweave their antlers.
Not a few arecaptured having the deep scars of these encounters,--furrowed heads,broken teeth, scolloped fins; and in some instances, wrenched anddislocated mouths.
But supposing the invader of domestic bliss to betake himself away atthe first rush of the harem's lord, then is it very diverting towatch that lord.
Gently he insinuates his vast bulk among them againand revels there awhile, still in tantalizing vicinity to youngLothario, like pious Solomon devoutly worshipping among his thousandconcubines.
Granting other whales to be in sight, the fishermenwill seldom give chase to one of these Grand Turks; for these GrandTurks are too lavish of their strength, and hence their unctuousnessis small.
As for the sons and the daughters they beget, why, those sonsand daughters must take care of themselves; at least, with only thematernal help.
For like certain other omnivorous roving lovers thatmight be named, my Lord Whale has no taste for the nursery, howevermuch for the bower; and so, being a great traveller, he leaves hisanonymous babies all over the world; every baby an exotic.
In goodtime, nevertheless, as the ardour of youth declines; as years anddumps increase; as reflection lends her solemn pauses; in short, as ageneral lassitude overtakes the sated Turk; then a love of ease andvirtue supplants the love for maidens; our Ottoman enters upon theimpotent, repentant, admonitory stage of life, forswears, disbandsthe harem, and grown to an exemplary, sulky old soul, goes about allalone among the meridians and parallels saying his prayers, andwarning each young Leviathan from his amorous errors.
Now, as the harem of whales is called by the fishermen a school, sois the lord and master of that school technically known as theschoolmaster.
It is therefore not in strict character, howeveradmirably satirical, that after going to school himself, he shouldthen go abroad inculcating not what he learned there, but the follyof it.
His title, schoolmaster, would very naturally seem derivedfrom the name bestowed upon the harem itself, but some have surmisedthat the man who first thus entitled this sort of Ottoman whale, musthave read the memoirs of Vidocq, and informed himself what sort of acountry-schoolmaster that famous Frenchman was in his younger days,and what was the nature of those occult lessons he inculcated intosome of his pupils.
The same secludedness and isolation to which the schoolmaster whalebetakes himself in his advancing years, is true of all aged SpermWhales.
Almost universally, a lone whale--as a solitary Leviathan iscalled--proves an ancient one.
Like venerable moss-bearded DanielBoone, he will have no one near him but Nature herself; and her hetakes to wife in the wilderness of waters, and the best of wives sheis, though she keeps so many moody secrets.
The schools composing none but young and vigorous males, previouslymentioned, offer a strong contrast to the harem schools.
For whilethose female whales are characteristically timid, the young males, orforty-barrel-bulls, as they call them, are by far the most pugnaciousof all Leviathans, and proverbially the most dangerous to encounter;excepting those wondrous grey-headed, grizzled whales, sometimes met,and these will fight you like grim fiends exasperated by a penalgout.
The Forty-barrel-bull schools are larger than the harem schools.
Like a mob of young collegians, they are full of fight, fun, andwickedness, tumbling round the world at such a reckless, rollickingrate, that no prudent underwriter would insure them any more than hewould a riotous lad at Yale or Harvard.
They soon relinquish thisturbulence though, and when about three-fourths grown, break up, andseparately go about in quest of settlements, that is, harems.
Another point of difference between the male and female schools isstill more characteristic of the sexes.
Say you strike aForty-barrel-bull--poor devil! all his comrades quit him.
But strikea member of the harem school, and her companions swim around her withevery token of concern, sometimes lingering so near her and so long,as themselves to fall a prey.
Fast-Fish and Loose-Fish.
The allusion to the waif and waif-poles in the last chapter but one,necessitates some account of the laws and regulations of the whalefishery, of which the waif may be deemed the grand symbol and badge.
It frequently happens that when several ships are cruising incompany, a whale may be struck by one vessel, then escape, and befinally killed and captured by another vessel; and herein areindirectly comprised many minor contingencies, all partaking of thisone grand feature.
For example,--after a weary and perilous chaseand capture of a whale, the body may get loose from the ship byreason of a violent storm; and drifting far away to leeward, beretaken by a second whaler, who, in a calm, snugly tows it alongside,without risk of life or line.
Thus the most vexatious and violentdisputes would often arise between the fishermen, were there not somewritten or unwritten, universal, undisputed law applicable to allcases.
Perhaps the only formal whaling code authorized by legislativeenactment, was that of Holland.
It was decreed by the States-Generalin A.
D.
1695.
But though no other nation has ever had any writtenwhaling law, yet the American fishermen have been their ownlegislators and lawyers in this matter.
They have provided a systemwhich for terse comprehensiveness surpasses Justinian's Pandects andthe By-laws of the Chinese Society for the Suppression of Meddlingwith other People's Business.
Yes; these laws might be engraven on aQueen Anne's forthing, or the barb of a harpoon, and worn round theneck, so small are they.
I.
A Fast-Fish belongs to the party fast to it.
II.
A Loose-Fish is fair game for anybody who can soonest catch it.
But what plays the mischief with this masterly code is the admirablebrevity of it, which necessitates a vast volume of commentaries toexpound it.
First: What is a Fast-Fish? Alive or dead a fish is technicallyfast, when it is connected with an occupied ship or boat, by anymedium at all controllable by the occupant or occupants,--a mast, anoar, a nine-inch cable, a telegraph wire, or a strand of cobweb, itis all the same.
Likewise a fish is technically fast when it bears awaif, or any other recognised symbol of possession; so long as theparty waifing it plainly evince their ability at any time to take italongside, as well as their intention so to do.
These are scientific commentaries; but the commentaries of thewhalemen themselves sometimes consist in hard words and harderknocks--the Coke-upon-Littleton of the fist.
True, among the moreupright and honourable whalemen allowances are always made forpeculiar cases, where it would be an outrageous moral injustice forone party to claim possession of a whale previously chased or killedby another party.
But others are by no means so scrupulous.
Some fifty years ago there was a curious case of whale-troverlitigated in England, wherein the plaintiffs set forth that after ahard chase of a whale in the Northern seas; and when indeed they (theplaintiffs) had succeeded in harpooning the fish; they were at last,through peril of their lives, obliged to forsake not only theirlines, but their boat itself.
Ultimately the defendants (the crew ofanother ship) came up with the whale, struck, killed, seized, andfinally appropriated it before the very eyes of the plaintiffs.
Andwhen those defendants were remonstrated with, their captain snappedhis fingers in the plaintiffs' teeth, and assured them that by way ofdoxology to the deed he had done, he would now retain their line,harpoons, and boat, which had remained attached to the whale at thetime of the seizure.
Wherefore the plaintiffs now sued for therecovery of the value of their whale, line, harpoons, and boat.
Mr.
Erskine was counsel for the defendants; Lord Ellenborough was thejudge.
In the course of the defence, the witty Erskine went on toillustrate his position, by alluding to a recent crim.
con.
case,wherein a gentleman, after in vain trying to bridle his wife'sviciousness, had at last abandoned her upon the seas of life; but inthe course of years, repenting of that step, he instituted an actionto recover possession of her.
Erskine was on the other side; and hethen supported it by saying, that though the gentleman had originallyharpooned the lady, and had once had her fast, and only by reason ofthe great stress of her plunging viciousness, had at last abandonedher; yet abandon her he did, so that she became a loose-fish; andtherefore when a subsequent gentleman re-harpooned her, the lady thenbecame that subsequent gentleman's property, along with whateverharpoon might have been found sticking in her.
Now in the present case Erskine contended that the examples of thewhale and the lady were reciprocally illustrative of each other.
These pleadings, and the counter pleadings, being duly heard, thevery learned Judge in set terms decided, to wit,--That as for theboat, he awarded it to the plaintiffs, because they had merelyabandoned it to save their lives; but that with regard to thecontroverted whale, harpoons, and line, they belonged to thedefendants; the whale, because it was a Loose-Fish at the time of thefinal capture; and the harpoons and line because when the fish madeoff with them, it (the fish) acquired a property in those articles;and hence anybody who afterwards took the fish had a right to them.
Now the defendants afterwards took the fish; ergo, the aforesaidarticles were theirs.
A common man looking at this decision of the very learned Judge,might possibly object to it.
But ploughed up to the primary rock ofthe matter, the two great principles laid down in the twin whalinglaws previously quoted, and applied and elucidated by LordEllenborough in the above cited case; these two laws touchingFast-Fish and Loose-Fish, I say, will, on reflection, be found thefundamentals of all human jurisprudence; for notwithstanding itscomplicated tracery of sculpture, the Temple of the Law, like theTemple of the Philistines, has but two props to stand on.
Is it not a saying in every one's mouth, Possession is half of thelaw: that is, regardless of how the thing came into possession? Butoften possession is the whole of the law.
What are the sinews andsouls of Russian serfs and Republican slaves but Fast-Fish, whereofpossession is the whole of the law? What to the rapacious landlordis the widow's last mite but a Fast-Fish? What is yonder undetectedvillain's marble mansion with a door-plate for a waif; what is thatbut a Fast-Fish? What is the ruinous discount which Mordecai, thebroker, gets from poor Woebegone, the bankrupt, on a loan tokeep Woebegone's family from starvation; what is that ruinousdiscount but a Fast-Fish? What is the Archbishop of Savesoul'sincome of L100,000 seized from the scant bread and cheese ofhundreds of thousands of broken-backed laborers (all sure of heavenwithout any of Savesoul's help) what is that globular L100,000 but aFast-Fish? What are the Duke of Dunder's hereditary towns andhamlets but Fast-Fish? What to that redoubted harpooneer, John Bull,is poor Ireland, but a Fast-Fish? What to that apostolic lancer,Brother Jonathan, is Texas but a Fast-Fish? And concerning allthese, is not Possession the whole of the law?But if the doctrine of Fast-Fish be pretty generally applicable, thekindred doctrine of Loose-Fish is still more widely so.
That isinternationally and universally applicable.
What was America in 1492 but a Loose-Fish, in which Columbus struckthe Spanish standard by way of waifing it for his royal master andmistress? What was Poland to the Czar? What Greece to the Turk?What India to England? What at last will Mexico be to the UnitedStates? All Loose-Fish.
What are the Rights of Man and the Liberties of the World butLoose-Fish? What all men's minds and opinions but Loose-Fish? Whatis the principle of religious belief in them but a Loose-Fish? Whatto the ostentatious smuggling verbalists are the thoughts of thinkersbut Loose-Fish? What is the great globe itself but a Loose-Fish?And what are you, reader, but a Loose-Fish and a Fast-Fish, too?Heads or Tails.
"De balena vero sufficit, si rex habeat caput, et regina caudam.
"BRACTON, L.
3, C.
3.
Latin from the books of the Laws of England, which taken along withthe context, means, that of all whales captured by anybody on thecoast of that land, the King, as Honourary Grand Harpooneer, must havethe head, and the Queen be respectfully presented with the tail.
Adivision which, in the whale, is much like halving an apple; there isno intermediate remainder.
Now as this law, under a modified form,is to this day in force in England; and as it offers in variousrespects a strange anomaly touching the general law of Fast andLoose-Fish, it is here treated of in a separate chapter, on the samecourteous principle that prompts the English railways to be at theexpense of a separate car, specially reserved for the accommodationof royalty.
In the first place, in curious proof of the fact thatthe above-mentioned law is still in force, I proceed to lay beforeyou a circumstance that happened within the last two years.
It seems that some honest mariners of Dover, or Sandwich, or some oneof the Cinque Ports, had after a hard chase succeeded in killing andbeaching a fine whale which they had originally descried afar offfrom the shore.
Now the Cinque Ports are partially or somehow underthe jurisdiction of a sort of policeman or beadle, called a LordWarden.
Holding the office directly from the crown, I believe, allthe royal emoluments incident to the Cinque Port territories becomeby assignment his.
By some writers this office is called a sinecure.
But not so.
Because the Lord Warden is busily employed at times infobbing his perquisites; which are his chiefly by virtue of that samefobbing of them.
Now when these poor sun-burnt mariners, bare-footed, and with theirtrowsers rolled high up on their eely legs, had wearily hauled theirfat fish high and dry, promising themselves a good L150 from theprecious oil and bone; and in fantasy sipping rare tea with theirwives, and good ale with their cronies, upon the strength of theirrespective shares; up steps a very learned and most Christian andcharitable gentleman, with a copy of Blackstone under his arm; andlaying it upon the whale's head, he says--"Hands off! this fish, mymasters, is a Fast-Fish.
I seize it as the Lord Warden's.
" Uponthis the poor mariners in their respectful consternation--so trulyEnglish--knowing not what to say, fall to vigorously scratching theirheads all round; meanwhile ruefully glancing from the whale to thestranger.
But that did in nowise mend the matter, or at all softenthe hard heart of the learned gentleman with the copy of Blackstone.
At length one of them, after long scratching about for his ideas,made bold to speak,"Please, sir, who is the Lord Warden?""The Duke.
""But the duke had nothing to do with taking this fish?""It is his.
""We have been at great trouble, and peril, and some expense, and isall that to go to the Duke's benefit; we getting nothing at all forour pains but our blisters?""It is his.
""Is the Duke so very poor as to be forced to this desperate mode ofgetting a livelihood?""It is his.
""I thought to relieve my old bed-ridden mother by part of my share ofthis whale.
""It is his.
""Won't the Duke be content with a quarter or a half?""It is his.
"In a word, the whale was seized and sold, and his Grace the Duke ofWellington received the money.
Thinking that viewed in someparticular lights, the case might by a bare possibility in some smalldegree be deemed, under the circumstances, a rather hard one, anhonest clergyman of the town respectfully addressed a note to hisGrace, begging him to take the case of those unfortunate marinersinto full consideration.
To which my Lord Duke in substance replied(both letters were published) that he had already done so, andreceived the money, and would be obliged to the reverend gentleman iffor the future he (the reverend gentleman) would decline meddlingwith other people's business.
Is this the still militant old man,standing at the corners of the three kingdoms, on all hands coercingalms of beggars?It will readily be seen that in this case the alleged right of theDuke to the whale was a delegated one from the Sovereign.
We mustneeds inquire then on what principle the Sovereign is originallyinvested with that right.
The law itself has already been set forth.
But Plowdon gives us the reason for it.
Says Plowdon, the whale socaught belongs to the King and Queen, "because of its superiorexcellence.
" And by the soundest commentators this has ever beenheld a cogent argument in such matters.
But why should the King have the head, and the Queen the tail? Areason for that, ye lawyers!In his treatise on "Queen-Gold," or Queen-pinmoney, an old King'sBench author, one William Prynne, thus discourseth: "Ye tail is yeQueen's, that ye Queen's wardrobe may be supplied with ye whalebone.
"Now this was written at a time when the black limber bone of theGreenland or Right whale was largely used in ladies' bodices.
Butthis same bone is not in the tail; it is in the head, which is a sadmistake for a sagacious lawyer like Prynne.
But is the Queen amermaid, to be presented with a tail? An allegorical meaning maylurk here.
There are two royal fish so styled by the English law writers--thewhale and the sturgeon; both royal property under certainlimitations, and nominally supplying the tenth branch of the crown'sordinary revenue.
I know not that any other author has hinted of thematter; but by inference it seems to me that the sturgeon must bedivided in the same way as the whale, the King receiving the highlydense and elastic head peculiar to that fish, which, symbolicallyregarded, may possibly be humorously grounded upon some presumedcongeniality.
And thus there seems a reason in all things, even inlaw.
The Pequod Meets The Rose-Bud.
"In vain it was to rake for Ambergriese in the paunch of thisLeviathan, insufferable fetor denying not inquiry.
"SIR T.
BROWNE, V.
E.
It was a week or two after the last whaling scene recounted, and whenwe were slowly sailing over a sleepy, vapoury, mid-day sea, that themany noses on the Pequod's deck proved more vigilant discoverers thanthe three pairs of eyes aloft.
A peculiar and not very pleasantsmell was smelt in the sea.
"I will bet something now," said Stubb, "that somewhere hereaboutsare some of those drugged whales we tickled the other day.
I thoughtthey would keel up before long.
"Presently, the vapours in advance slid aside; and there in thedistance lay a ship, whose furled sails betokened that some sort ofwhale must be alongside.
As we glided nearer, the stranger showedFrench colours from his peak; and by the eddying cloud of vulturesea-fowl that circled, and hovered, and swooped around him, it wasplain that the whale alongside must be what the fishermen call ablasted whale, that is, a whale that has died unmolested on the sea,and so floated an unappropriated corpse.
It may well be conceived,what an unsavory odor such a mass must exhale; worse than an Assyriancity in the plague, when the living are incompetent to bury thedeparted.
So intolerable indeed is it regarded by some, that nocupidity could persuade them to moor alongside of it.
Yet are therethose who will still do it; notwithstanding the fact that the oilobtained from such subjects is of a very inferior quality, and by nomeans of the nature of attar-of-rose.
Coming still nearer with the expiring breeze, we saw that theFrenchman had a second whale alongside; and this second whale seemedeven more of a nosegay than the first.
In truth, it turned out to beone of those problematical whales that seem to dry up and die with asort of prodigious dyspepsia, or indigestion; leaving their defunctbodies almost entirely bankrupt of anything like oil.
Nevertheless,in the proper place we shall see that no knowing fisherman will everturn up his nose at such a whale as this, however much he may shunblasted whales in general.
The Pequod had now swept so nigh to the stranger, that Stubb vowed herecognised his cutting spade-pole entangled in the lines that wereknotted round the tail of one of these whales.
"There's a pretty fellow, now," he banteringly laughed, standing inthe ship's bows, "there's a jackal for ye! I well know that theseCrappoes of Frenchmen are but poor devils in the fishery; sometimeslowering their boats for breakers, mistaking them for Sperm Whalespouts; yes, and sometimes sailing from their port with their holdfull of boxes of tallow candles, and cases of snuffers, foreseeingthat all the oil they will get won't be enough to dip the Captain'swick into; aye, we all know these things; but look ye, here's aCrappo that is content with our leavings, the drugged whale there, Imean; aye, and is content too with scraping the dry bones of thatother precious fish he has there.
Poor devil! I say, pass round ahat, some one, and let's make him a present of a little oil for dearcharity's sake.
For what oil he'll get from that drugged whalethere, wouldn't be fit to burn in a jail; no, not in a condemnedcell.
And as for the other whale, why, I'll agree to get more oil bychopping up and trying out these three masts of ours, than he'll getfrom that bundle of bones; though, now that I think of it, it maycontain something worth a good deal more than oil; yes, ambergris.
Iwonder now if our old man has thought of that.
It's worth trying.
Yes, I'm for it;" and so saying he started for the quarter-deck.
By this time the faint air had become a complete calm; so thatwhether or no, the Pequod was now fairly entrapped in the smell, withno hope of escaping except by its breezing up again.
Issuing fromthe cabin, Stubb now called his boat's crew, and pulled off for thestranger.
Drawing across her bow, he perceived that in accordancewith the fanciful French taste, the upper part of her stem-piece wascarved in the likeness of a huge drooping stalk, was painted green,and for thorns had copper spikes projecting from it here and there;the whole terminating in a symmetrical folded bulb of a bright redcolour.
Upon her head boards, in large gilt letters, he read "Boutonde Rose,"--Rose-button, or Rose-bud; and this was the romantic nameof this aromatic ship.
Though Stubb did not understand the BOUTON part of the inscription,yet the word ROSE, and the bulbous figure-head put together,sufficiently explained the whole to him.
"A wooden rose-bud, eh?" he cried with his hand to his nose, "thatwill do very well; but how like all creation it smells!"Now in order to hold direct communication with the people on deck, hehad to pull round the bows to the starboard side, and thus come closeto the blasted whale; and so talk over it.
Arrived then at this spot, with one hand still to his nose, hebawled--"Bouton-de-Rose, ahoy! are there any of you Bouton-de-Rosesthat speak English?""Yes," rejoined a Guernsey-man from the bulwarks, who turned out tobe the chief-mate.
"Well, then, my Bouton-de-Rose-bud, have you seen the White Whale?""WHAT whale?""The WHITE Whale--a Sperm Whale--Moby Dick, have ye seen him?"Never heard of such a whale.
Cachalot Blanche! White Whale--no.
""Very good, then; good bye now, and I'll call again in a minute.
"Then rapidly pulling back towards the Pequod, and seeing Ahab leaningover the quarter-deck rail awaiting his report, he moulded his twohands into a trumpet and shouted--"No, Sir! No!" Upon which Ahabretired, and Stubb returned to the Frenchman.
He now perceived that the Guernsey-man, who had just got into thechains, and was using a cutting-spade, had slung his nose in a sortof bag.
"What's the matter with your nose, there?" said Stubb.
"Broke it?""I wish it was broken, or that I didn't have any nose at all!"answered the Guernsey-man, who did not seem to relish the job he wasat very much.
"But what are you holding YOURS for?""Oh, nothing! It's a wax nose; I have to hold it on.
Fine day,ain't it? Air rather gardenny, I should say; throw us a bunch ofposies, will ye, Bouton-de-Rose?""What in the devil's name do you want here?" roared the Guernseyman,flying into a sudden passion.
"Oh! keep cool--cool? yes, that's the word! why don't you pack thosewhales in ice while you're working at 'em? But joking aside, though;do you know, Rose-bud, that it's all nonsense trying to get any oilout of such whales? As for that dried up one, there, he hasn't agill in his whole carcase.
""I know that well enough; but, d'ye see, the Captain here won'tbelieve it; this is his first voyage; he was a Cologne manufacturerbefore.
But come aboard, and mayhap he'll believe you, if he won'tme; and so I'll get out of this dirty scrape.
""Anything to oblige ye, my sweet and pleasant fellow," rejoinedStubb, and with that he soon mounted to the deck.
There a queerscene presented itself.
The sailors, in tasselled caps of redworsted, were getting the heavy tackles in readiness for the whales.
But they worked rather slow and talked very fast, and seemed inanything but a good humor.
All their noses upwardly projected fromtheir faces like so many jib-booms.
Now and then pairs of them woulddrop their work, and run up to the mast-head to get some fresh air.
Some thinking they would catch the plague, dipped oakum in coal-tar,and at intervals held it to their nostrils.
Others having broken thestems of their pipes almost short off at the bowl, were vigorouslypuffing tobacco-smoke, so that it constantly filled theirolfactories.
Stubb was struck by a shower of outcries and anathemas proceedingfrom the Captain's round-house abaft; and looking in that directionsaw a fiery face thrust from behind the door, which was held ajarfrom within.
This was the tormented surgeon, who, after in vainremonstrating against the proceedings of the day, had betaken himselfto the Captain's round-house (CABINET he called it) to avoid thepest; but still, could not help yelling out his entreaties andindignations at times.
Marking all this, Stubb argued well for his scheme, and turning tothe Guernsey-man had a little chat with him, during which thestranger mate expressed his detestation of his Captain as a conceitedignoramus, who had brought them all into so unsavory and unprofitablea pickle.
Sounding him carefully, Stubb further perceived that theGuernsey-man had not the slightest suspicion concerning theambergris.
He therefore held his peace on that head, but otherwisewas quite frank and confidential with him, so that the two quicklyconcocted a little plan for both circumventing and satirizing theCaptain, without his at all dreaming of distrusting their sincerity.
According to this little plan of theirs, the Guernsey-man, undercover of an interpreter's office, was to tell the Captain what hepleased, but as coming from Stubb; and as for Stubb, he was to utterany nonsense that should come uppermost in him during the interview.
By this time their destined victim appeared from his cabin.
He was asmall and dark, but rather delicate looking man for a sea-captain,with large whiskers and moustache, however; and wore a red cottonvelvet vest with watch-seals at his side.
To this gentleman, Stubbwas now politely introduced by the Guernsey-man, who at onceostentatiously put on the aspect of interpreting between them.
"What shall I say to him first?" said he.
"Why," said Stubb, eyeing the velvet vest and the watch and seals,"you may as well begin by telling him that he looks a sort of babyishto me, though I don't pretend to be a judge.
""He says, Monsieur," said the Guernsey-man, in French, turning to hiscaptain, "that only yesterday his ship spoke a vessel, whose captainand chief-mate, with six sailors, had all died of a fever caught froma blasted whale they had brought alongside.
"Upon this the captain started, and eagerly desired to know more.
"What now?" said the Guernsey-man to Stubb.
"Why, since he takes it so easy, tell him that now I have eyed himcarefully, I'm quite certain that he's no more fit to command awhale-ship than a St.
Jago monkey.
In fact, tell him from me he's ababoon.
""He vows and declares, Monsieur, that the other whale, the dried one,is far more deadly than the blasted one; in fine, Monsieur, heconjures us, as we value our lives, to cut loose from these fish.
"Instantly the captain ran forward, and in a loud voice commanded hiscrew to desist from hoisting the cutting-tackles, and at once castloose the cables and chains confining the whales to the ship.
"What now?" said the Guernsey-man, when the Captain had returned tothem.
"Why, let me see; yes, you may as well tell him now that--that--infact, tell him I've diddled him, and (aside to himself) perhapssomebody else.
""He says, Monsieur, that he's very happy to have been of any serviceto us.
"Hearing this, the captain vowed that they were the grateful parties(meaning himself and mate) and concluded by inviting Stubb downinto his cabin to drink a bottle of Bordeaux.
"He wants you to take a glass of wine with him," said theinterpreter.
"Thank him heartily; but tell him it's against my principles to drinkwith the man I've diddled.
In fact, tell him I must go.
""He says, Monsieur, that his principles won't admit of his drinking;but that if Monsieur wants to live another day to drink, thenMonsieur had best drop all four boats, and pull the ship away fromthese whales, for it's so calm they won't drift.
"By this time Stubb was over the side, and getting into his boat,hailed the Guernsey-man to this effect,--that having a long tow-linein his boat, he would do what he could to help them, by pulling outthe lighter whale of the two from the ship's side.
While theFrenchman's boats, then, were engaged in towing the ship one way,Stubb benevolently towed away at his whale the other way,ostentatiously slacking out a most unusually long tow-line.
Presently a breeze sprang up; Stubb feigned to cast off from thewhale; hoisting his boats, the Frenchman soon increased his distance,while the Pequod slid in between him and Stubb's whale.
WhereuponStubb quickly pulled to the floating body, and hailing the Pequod togive notice of his intentions, at once proceeded to reap the fruit ofhis unrighteous cunning.
Seizing his sharp boat-spade, he commencedan excavation in the body, a little behind the side fin.
You wouldalmost have thought he was digging a cellar there in the sea; andwhen at length his spade struck against the gaunt ribs, it was liketurning up old Roman tiles and pottery buried in fat English loam.
His boat's crew were all in high excitement, eagerly helping theirchief, and looking as anxious as gold-hunters.
And all the time numberless fowls were diving, and ducking, andscreaming, and yelling, and fighting around them.
Stubb wasbeginning to look disappointed, especially as the horrible nosegayincreased, when suddenly from out the very heart of this plague,there stole a faint stream of perfume, which flowed through the tideof bad smells without being absorbed by it, as one river will flowinto and then along with another, without at all blending with it fora time.
"I have it, I have it," cried Stubb, with delight, striking somethingin the subterranean regions, "a purse! a purse!"Dropping his spade, he thrust both hands in, and drew out handfuls ofsomething that looked like ripe Windsor soap, or rich mottled oldcheese; very unctuous and savory withal.
You might easily dent itwith your thumb; it is of a hue between yellow and ash colour.
Andthis, good friends, is ambergris, worth a gold guinea an ounce to anydruggist.
Some six handfuls were obtained; but more was unavoidablylost in the sea, and still more, perhaps, might have been securedwere it not for impatient Ahab's loud command to Stubb to desist, andcome on board, else the ship would bid them good bye.
Ambergris.
Now this ambergris is a very curious substance, and so important asan article of commerce, that in 1791 a certain Nantucket-born CaptainCoffin was examined at the bar of the English House of Commons onthat subject.
For at that time, and indeed until a comparativelylate day, the precise origin of ambergris remained, like amberitself, a problem to the learned.
Though the word ambergris is butthe French compound for grey amber, yet the two substances are quitedistinct.
For amber, though at times found on the sea-coast, is alsodug up in some far inland soils, whereas ambergris is never foundexcept upon the sea.
Besides, amber is a hard, transparent, brittle,odorless substance, used for mouth-pieces to pipes, for beads andornaments; but ambergris is soft, waxy, and so highly fragrant andspicy, that it is largely used in perfumery, in pastiles, preciouscandles, hair-powders, and pomatum.
The Turks use it in cooking, andalso carry it to Mecca, for the same purpose that frankincense iscarried to St.
Peter's in Rome.
Some wine merchants drop a fewgrains into claret, to flavor it.
Who would think, then, that such fine ladies and gentlemen shouldregale themselves with an essence found in the inglorious bowels of asick whale! Yet so it is.
By some, ambergris is supposed to be thecause, and by others the effect, of the dyspepsia in the whale.
Howto cure such a dyspepsia it were hard to say, unless by administeringthree or four boat loads of Brandreth's pills, and then running outof harm's way, as laborers do in blasting rocks.
I have forgotten to say that there were found in this ambergris,certain hard, round, bony plates, which at first Stubb thought mightbe sailors' trowsers buttons; but it afterwards turned out that theywere nothing more than pieces of small squid bones embalmed in thatmanner.
Now that the incorruption of this most fragrant ambergris should befound in the heart of such decay; is this nothing? Bethink thee ofthat saying of St.
Paul in Corinthians, about corruption andincorruption; how that we are sown in dishonour, but raised in glory.
And likewise call to mind that saying of Paracelsus about what it isthat maketh the best musk.
Also forget not the strange fact that ofall things of ill-savor, Cologne-water, in its rudimentalmanufacturing stages, is the worst.
I should like to conclude the chapter with the above appeal, butcannot, owing to my anxiety to repel a charge often made againstwhalemen, and which, in the estimation of some already biased minds,might be considered as indirectly substantiated by what has been saidof the Frenchman's two whales.
Elsewhere in this volume theslanderous aspersion has been disproved, that the vocation of whalingis throughout a slatternly, untidy business.
But there is anotherthing to rebut.
They hint that all whales always smell bad.
Now howdid this odious stigma originate?I opine, that it is plainly traceable to the first arrival of theGreenland whaling ships in London, more than two centuries ago.
Because those whalemen did not then, and do not now, try out theiroil at sea as the Southern ships have always done; but cutting up thefresh blubber in small bits, thrust it through the bung holes oflarge casks, and carry it home in that manner; the shortness of theseason in those Icy Seas, and the sudden and violent storms to whichthey are exposed, forbidding any other course.
The consequence is,that upon breaking into the hold, and unloading one of these whalecemeteries, in the Greenland dock, a savor is given forth somewhatsimilar to that arising from excavating an old city grave-yard, forthe foundations of a Lying-in-Hospital.
I partly surmise also, that this wicked charge against whalers may belikewise imputed to the existence on the coast of Greenland, informer times, of a Dutch village called Schmerenburgh or Smeerenberg,which latter name is the one used by the learned Fogo Von Slack, inhis great work on Smells, a text-book on that subject.
As its nameimports (smeer, fat; berg, to put up), this village was founded inorder to afford a place for the blubber of the Dutch whale fleet tobe tried out, without being taken home to Holland for that purpose.
It was a collection of furnaces, fat-kettles, and oil sheds; and whenthe works were in full operation certainly gave forth no verypleasant savor.
But all this is quite different with a South SeaSperm Whaler; which in a voyage of four years perhaps, aftercompletely filling her hold with oil, does not, perhaps, consumefifty days in the business of boiling out; and in the state that itis casked, the oil is nearly scentless.
The truth is, that living ordead, if but decently treated, whales as a species are by no meanscreatures of ill odor; nor can whalemen be recognised, as the peopleof the middle ages affected to detect a Jew in the company, by thenose.
Nor indeed can the whale possibly be otherwise than fragrant,when, as a general thing, he enjoys such high health; takingabundance of exercise; always out of doors; though, it is true,seldom in the open air.
I say, that the motion of a Sperm Whale'sflukes above water dispenses a perfume, as when a musk-scented ladyrustles her dress in a warm parlor.
What then shall I liken theSperm Whale to for fragrance, considering his magnitude? Must it notbe to that famous elephant, with jewelled tusks, and redolent withmyrrh, which was led out of an Indian town to do honour to Alexanderthe Great?The Castaway.
It was but some few days after encountering the Frenchman, that amost significant event befell the most insignificant of the Pequod'screw; an event most lamentable; and which ended in providing thesometimes madly merry and predestinated craft with a living and everaccompanying prophecy of whatever shattered sequel might prove herown.
Now, in the whale ship, it is not every one that goes in the boats.
Some few hands are reserved called ship-keepers, whose province it isto work the vessel while the boats are pursuing the whale.
As ageneral thing, these ship-keepers are as hardy fellows as the mencomprising the boats' crews.
But if there happen to be an undulyslender, clumsy, or timorous wight in the ship, that wight is certainto be made a ship-keeper.
It was so in the Pequod with the littlenegro Pippin by nick-name, Pip by abbreviation.
Poor Pip! ye haveheard of him before; ye must remember his tambourine on that dramaticmidnight, so gloomy-jolly.
In outer aspect, Pip and Dough-Boy made a match, like a black ponyand a white one, of equal developments, though of dissimilar colour,driven in one eccentric span.
But while hapless Dough-Boy was bynature dull and torpid in his intellects, Pip, though overtender-hearted, was at bottom very bright, with that pleasant,genial, jolly brightness peculiar to his tribe; a tribe, which everenjoy all holidays and festivities with finer, freer relish than anyother race.
For blacks, the year's calendar should show naught butthree hundred and sixty-five Fourth of Julys and New Year's Days.
Nor smile so, while I write that this little black was brilliant, foreven blackness has its brilliancy; behold yon lustrous ebony,panelled in king's cabinets.
But Pip loved life, and all life'speaceable securities; so that the panic-striking business in which hehad somehow unaccountably become entrapped, had most sadly blurredhis brightness; though, as ere long will be seen, what was thustemporarily subdued in him, in the end was destined to be luridlyillumined by strange wild fires, that fictitiously showed him off toten times the natural lustre with which in his native Tolland Countyin Connecticut, he had once enlivened many a fiddler's frolic on thegreen; and at melodious even-tide, with his gay ha-ha! had turned theround horizon into one star-belled tambourine.
So, though in theclear air of day, suspended against a blue-veined neck, thepure-watered diamond drop will healthful glow; yet, when the cunningjeweller would show you the diamond in its most impressive lustre, helays it against a gloomy ground, and then lights it up, not by thesun, but by some unnatural gases.
Then come out those fieryeffulgences, infernally superb; then the evil-blazing diamond, oncethe divinest symbol of the crystal skies, looks like some crown-jewelstolen from the King of Hell.
But let us to the story.
It came to pass, that in the ambergris affair Stubb's after-oarsmanchanced so to sprain his hand, as for a time to become quite maimed;and, temporarily, Pip was put into his place.
The first time Stubb lowered with him, Pip evinced much nervousness;but happily, for that time, escaped close contact with the whale; andtherefore came off not altogether discreditably; though Stubbobserving him, took care, afterwards, to exhort him to cherish hiscourageousness to the utmost, for he might often find it needful.
Now upon the second lowering, the boat paddled upon the whale; and asthe fish received the darted iron, it gave its customary rap, whichhappened, in this instance, to be right under poor Pip's seat.
Theinvoluntary consternation of the moment caused him to leap, paddle inhand, out of the boat; and in such a way, that part of the slackwhale line coming against his chest, he breasted it overboard withhim, so as to become entangled in it, when at last plumping into thewater.
That instant the stricken whale started on a fierce run, theline swiftly straightened; and presto! poor Pip came all foaming upto the chocks of the boat, remorselessly dragged there by the line,which had taken several turns around his chest and neck.
Tashtego stood in the bows.
He was full of the fire of the hunt.
Hehated Pip for a poltroon.
Snatching the boat-knife from its sheath,he suspended its sharp edge over the line, and turning towards Stubb,exclaimed interrogatively, "Cut?" Meantime Pip's blue, choked faceplainly looked, Do, for God's sake! All passed in a flash.
In lessthan half a minute, this entire thing happened.
"Damn him, cut!" roared Stubb; and so the whale was lost and Pip wassaved.
So soon as he recovered himself, the poor little negro was assailedby yells and execrations from the crew.
Tranquilly permitting theseirregular cursings to evaporate, Stubb then in a plain,business-like, but still half humorous manner, cursed Pip officially;and that done, unofficially gave him much wholesome advice.
Thesubstance was, Never jump from a boat, Pip, except--but all the restwas indefinite, as the soundest advice ever is.
Now, in general,STICK TO THE BOAT, is your true motto in whaling; but cases willsometimes happen when LEAP FROM THE BOAT, is still better.
Moreover,as if perceiving at last that if he should give undilutedconscientious advice to Pip, he would be leaving him too wide amargin to jump in for the future; Stubb suddenly dropped all advice,and concluded with a peremptory command, "Stick to the boat, Pip, orby the Lord, I won't pick you up if you jump; mind that.
We can'tafford to lose whales by the likes of you; a whale would sell forthirty times what you would, Pip, in Alabama.
Bear that in mind, anddon't jump any more.
" Hereby perhaps Stubb indirectly hinted, thatthough man loved his fellow, yet man is a money-making animal, whichpropensity too often interferes with his benevolence.
But we are all in the hands of the Gods; and Pip jumped again.
Itwas under very similar circumstances to the first performance; butthis time he did not breast out the line; and hence, when the whalestarted to run, Pip was left behind on the sea, like a hurriedtraveller's trunk.
Alas! Stubb was but too true to his word.
Itwas a beautiful, bounteous, blue day; the spangled sea calm andcool, and flatly stretching away, all round, to the horizon, likegold-beater's skin hammered out to the extremest.
Bobbing up anddown in that sea, Pip's ebon head showed like a head of cloves.
Noboat-knife was lifted when he fell so rapidly astern.
Stubb'sinexorable back was turned upon him; and the whale was winged.
Inthree minutes, a whole mile of shoreless ocean was between Pip andStubb.
Out from the centre of the sea, poor Pip turned his crisp,curling, black head to the sun, another lonely castaway, though theloftiest and the brightest.
Now, in calm weather, to swim in the open ocean is as easy to thepractised swimmer as to ride in a spring-carriage ashore.
But theawful lonesomeness is intolerable.
The intense concentration of selfin the middle of such a heartless immensity, my God! who can tell it?Mark, how when sailors in a dead calm bathe in the open sea--markhow closely they hug their ship and only coast along her sides.
But had Stubb really abandoned the poor little negro to his fate?No; he did not mean to, at least.
Because there were two boats inhis wake, and he supposed, no doubt, that they would of course comeup to Pip very quickly, and pick him up; though, indeed, suchconsiderations towards oarsmen jeopardized through their owntimidity, is not always manifested by the hunters in all similarinstances; and such instances not unfrequently occur; almostinvariably in the fishery, a coward, so called, is marked with thesame ruthless detestation peculiar to military navies and armies.
But it so happened, that those boats, without seeing Pip, suddenlyspying whales close to them on one side, turned, and gave chase; andStubb's boat was now so far away, and he and all his crew so intentupon his fish, that Pip's ringed horizon began to expand around himmiserably.
By the merest chance the ship itself at last rescued him;but from that hour the little negro went about the deck an idiot;such, at least, they said he was.
The sea had jeeringly kept hisfinite body up, but drowned the infinite of his soul.
Not drownedentirely, though.
Rather carried down alive to wondrous depths,where strange shapes of the unwarped primal world glided to and frobefore his passive eyes; and the miser-merman, Wisdom, revealed hishoarded heaps; and among the joyous, heartless, ever-juvenileeternities, Pip saw the multitudinous, God-omnipresent, coralinsects, that out of the firmament of waters heaved the colossalorbs.
He saw God's foot upon the treadle of the loom, and spoke it;and therefore his shipmates called him mad.
So man's insanity isheaven's sense; and wandering from all mortal reason, man comes atlast to that celestial thought, which, to reason, is absurd andfrantic; and weal or woe, feels then uncompromised, indifferent ashis God.
For the rest, blame not Stubb too hardly.
The thing is common inthat fishery; and in the sequel of the narrative, it will then beseen what like abandonment befell myself.
A Squeeze of the Hand.
That whale of Stubb's, so dearly purchased, was duly brought to thePequod's side, where all those cutting and hoisting operationspreviously detailed, were regularly gone through, even to the balingof the Heidelburgh Tun, or Case.
While some were occupied with this latter duty, others were employedin dragging away the larger tubs, so soon as filled with the sperm;and when the proper time arrived, this same sperm was carefullymanipulated ere going to the try-works, of which anon.
It had cooled and crystallized to such a degree, that when, withseveral others, I sat down before a large Constantine's bath of it, Ifound it strangely concreted into lumps, here and there rolling aboutin the liquid part.
It was our business to squeeze these lumps backinto fluid.
A sweet and unctuous duty! No wonder that in old timesthis sperm was such a favourite cosmetic.
Such a clearer! such asweetener! such a softener! such a delicious molifier! Afterhaving my hands in it for only a few minutes, my fingers felt likeeels, and began, as it were, to serpentine and spiralise.
As I sat there at my ease, cross-legged on the deck; after the bitterexertion at the windlass; under a blue tranquil sky; the ship underindolent sail, and gliding so serenely along; as I bathed my handsamong those soft, gentle globules of infiltrated tissues, wovenalmost within the hour; as they richly broke to my fingers, anddischarged all their opulence, like fully ripe grapes their wine; asI snuffed up that uncontaminated aroma,--literally and truly, likethe smell of spring violets; I declare to you, that for the time Ilived as in a musky meadow; I forgot all about our horrible oath; inthat inexpressible sperm, I washed my hands and my heart of it; Ialmost began to credit the old Paracelsan superstition that sperm isof rare virtue in allaying the heat of anger; while bathing in thatbath, I felt divinely free from all ill-will, or petulance, ormalice, of any sort whatsoever.
Squeeze! squeeze! squeeze! all the morning long; I squeezed thatsperm till I myself almost melted into it; I squeezed that sperm tilla strange sort of insanity came over me; and I found myselfunwittingly squeezing my co-laborers' hands in it, mistaking theirhands for the gentle globules.
Such an abounding, affectionate,friendly, loving feeling did this avocation beget; that at last I wascontinually squeezing their hands, and looking up into their eyessentimentally; as much as to say,--Oh! my dear fellow beings, whyshould we longer cherish any social acerbities, or know the slightestill-humor or envy! Come; let us squeeze hands all round; nay, let usall squeeze ourselves into each other; let us squeeze ourselvesuniversally into the very milk and sperm of kindness.
Would that I could keep squeezing that sperm for ever! For now,since by many prolonged, repeated experiences, I have perceived thatin all cases man must eventually lower, or at least shift, hisconceit of attainable felicity; not placing it anywhere in theintellect or the fancy; but in the wife, the heart, the bed, thetable, the saddle, the fireside, the country; now that I haveperceived all this, I am ready to squeeze case eternally.
Inthoughts of the visions of the night, I saw long rows of angels inparadise, each with his hands in a jar of spermaceti.
Now, while discoursing of sperm, it behooves to speak of other thingsakin to it, in the business of preparing the sperm whale for thetry-works.
First comes white-horse, so called, which is obtained from thetapering part of the fish, and also from the thicker portions of hisflukes.
It is tough with congealed tendons--a wad of muscle--butstill contains some oil.
After being severed from the whale, thewhite-horse is first cut into portable oblongs ere going to themincer.
They look much like blocks of Berkshire marble.
Plum-pudding is the term bestowed upon certain fragmentary parts ofthe whale's flesh, here and there adhering to the blanket of blubber,and often participating to a considerable degree in its unctuousness.
It is a most refreshing, convivial, beautiful object to behold.
Asits name imports, it is of an exceedingly rich, mottled tint, with abestreaked snowy and golden ground, dotted with spots of the deepestcrimson and purple.
It is plums of rubies, in pictures of citron.
Spite of reason, it is hard to keep yourself from eating it.
Iconfess, that once I stole behind the foremast to try it.
It tastedsomething as I should conceive a royal cutlet from the thigh of Louisle Gros might have tasted, supposing him to have been killed thefirst day after the venison season, and that particular venisonseason contemporary with an unusually fine vintage of the vineyardsof Champagne.
There is another substance, and a very singular one, which turns upin the course of this business, but which I feel it to be verypuzzling adequately to describe.
It is called slobgollion; anappellation original with the whalemen, and even so is the nature ofthe substance.
It is an ineffably oozy, stringy affair, mostfrequently found in the tubs of sperm, after a prolonged squeezing,and subsequent decanting.
I hold it to be the wondrously thin,ruptured membranes of the case, coalescing.
Gurry, so called, is a term properly belonging to right whalemen, butsometimes incidentally used by the sperm fishermen.
It designatesthe dark, glutinous substance which is scraped off the back of theGreenland or right whale, and much of which covers the decks of thoseinferior souls who hunt that ignoble Leviathan.
Nippers.
Strictly this word is not indigenous to the whale'svocabulary.
But as applied by whalemen, it becomes so.
A whaleman'snipper is a short firm strip of tendinous stuff cut from the taperingpart of Leviathan's tail: it averages an inch in thickness, and forthe rest, is about the size of the iron part of a hoe.
Edgewisemoved along the oily deck, it operates like a leathern squilgee; andby nameless blandishments, as of magic, allures along with it allimpurities.
But to learn all about these recondite matters, your best way is atonce to descend into the blubber-room, and have a long talk with itsinmates.
This place has previously been mentioned as the receptaclefor the blanket-pieces, when stript and hoisted from the whale.
Whenthe proper time arrives for cutting up its contents, this apartmentis a scene of terror to all tyros, especially by night.
On one side,lit by a dull lantern, a space has been left clear for the workmen.
They generally go in pairs,--a pike-and-gaffman and a spade-man.
The whaling-pike is similar to a frigate's boarding-weapon of thesame name.
The gaff is something like a boat-hook.
With his gaff,the gaffman hooks on to a sheet of blubber, and strives to hold itfrom slipping, as the ship pitches and lurches about.
Meanwhile, thespade-man stands on the sheet itself, perpendicularly chopping itinto the portable horse-pieces.
This spade is sharp as hone can makeit; the spademan's feet are shoeless; the thing he stands on willsometimes irresistibly slide away from him, like a sledge.
If hecuts off one of his own toes, or one of his assistants', would you bevery much astonished? Toes are scarce among veteran blubber-roommen.
The Cassock.
Had you stepped on board the Pequod at a certain juncture of thispost-mortemizing of the whale; and had you strolled forward nigh thewindlass, pretty sure am I that you would have scanned with no smallcuriosity a very strange, enigmatical object, which you would haveseen there, lying along lengthwise in the lee scuppers.
Not thewondrous cistern in the whale's huge head; not the prodigy of hisunhinged lower jaw; not the miracle of his symmetrical tail; none ofthese would so surprise you, as half a glimpse of that unaccountablecone,--longer than a Kentuckian is tall, nigh a foot in diameter atthe base, and jet-black as Yojo, the ebony idol of Queequeg.
And anidol, indeed, it is; or, rather, in old times, its likeness was.
Such an idol as that found in the secret groves of Queen Maachah inJudea; and for worshipping which, King Asa, her son, did depose her,and destroyed the idol, and burnt it for an abomination at the brookKedron, as darkly set forth in the 15th chapter of the First Book ofKings.
Look at the sailor, called the mincer, who now comes along, andassisted by two allies, heavily backs the grandissimus, as themariners call it, and with bowed shoulders, staggers off with it asif he were a grenadier carrying a dead comrade from the field.
Extending it upon the forecastle deck, he now proceeds cylindricallyto remove its dark pelt, as an African hunter the pelt of a boa.
This done he turns the pelt inside out, like a pantaloon leg; givesit a good stretching, so as almost to double its diameter; and atlast hangs it, well spread, in the rigging, to dry.
Ere long, it istaken down; when removing some three feet of it, towards the pointedextremity, and then cutting two slits for arm-holes at the other end,he lengthwise slips himself bodily into it.
The mincer now standsbefore you invested in the full canonicals of his calling.
Immemorial to all his order, this investiture alone will adequatelyprotect him, while employed in the peculiar functions of his office.
That office consists in mincing the horse-pieces of blubber for thepots; an operation which is conducted at a curious wooden horse,planted endwise against the bulwarks, and with a capacious tubbeneath it, into which the minced pieces drop, fast as the sheetsfrom a rapt orator's desk.
Arrayed in decent black; occupying aconspicuous pulpit; intent on bible leaves; what a candidate for anarchbishopric, what a lad for a Pope were this mincer!**Bible leaves! Bible leaves! This is the invariable cry from themates to the mincer.
It enjoins him to be careful, and cut his workinto as thin slices as possible, inasmuch as by so doing the businessof boiling out the oil is much accelerated, and its quantityconsiderably increased, besides perhaps improving it in quality.
The Try-Works.
Besides her hoisted boats, an American whaler is outwardlydistinguished by her try-works.
She presents the curious anomaly ofthe most solid masonry joining with oak and hemp in constituting thecompleted ship.
It is as if from the open field a brick-kiln weretransported to her planks.
The try-works are planted between the foremast and mainmast, themost roomy part of the deck.
The timbers beneath are of a peculiarstrength, fitted to sustain the weight of an almost solid mass ofbrick and mortar, some ten feet by eight square, and five in height.
The foundation does not penetrate the deck, but the masonry is firmlysecured to the surface by ponderous knees of iron bracing it on allsides, and screwing it down to the timbers.
On the flanks it iscased with wood, and at top completely covered by a large, sloping,battened hatchway.
Removing this hatch we expose the great try-pots,two in number, and each of several barrels' capacity.
When not inuse, they are kept remarkably clean.
Sometimes they are polishedwith soapstone and sand, till they shine within like silverpunch-bowls.
During the night-watches some cynical old sailors willcrawl into them and coil themselves away there for a nap.
Whileemployed in polishing them--one man in each pot, side by side--manyconfidential communications are carried on, over the iron lips.
Itis a place also for profound mathematical meditation.
It was in theleft hand try-pot of the Pequod, with the soapstone diligentlycircling round me, that I was first indirectly struck by theremarkable fact, that in geometry all bodies gliding along thecycloid, my soapstone for example, will descend from any point inprecisely the same time.
Removing the fire-board from the front of the try-works, the baremasonry of that side is exposed, penetrated by the two iron mouths ofthe furnaces, directly underneath the pots.
These mouths are fittedwith heavy doors of iron.
The intense heat of the fire is preventedfrom communicating itself to the deck, by means of a shallowreservoir extending under the entire inclosed surface of the works.
By a tunnel inserted at the rear, this reservoir is kept replenishedwith water as fast as it evaporates.
There are no external chimneys;they open direct from the rear wall.
And here let us go back for amoment.
It was about nine o'clock at night that the Pequod's try-works werefirst started on this present voyage.
It belonged to Stubb tooversee the business.
"All ready there? Off hatch, then, and start her.
You cook, firethe works.
" This was an easy thing, for the carpenter had beenthrusting his shavings into the furnace throughout the passage.
Herebe it said that in a whaling voyage the first fire in the try-works hasto be fed for a time with wood.
After that no wood is used, exceptas a means of quick ignition to the staple fuel.
In a word, afterbeing tried out, the crisp, shrivelled blubber, now called scraps orfritters, still contains considerable of its unctuous properties.
These fritters feed the flames.
Like a plethoric burning martyr, ora self-consuming misanthrope, once ignited, the whale supplies hisown fuel and burns by his own body.
Would that he consumed his ownsmoke! for his smoke is horrible to inhale, and inhale it you must,and not only that, but you must live in it for the time.
It has anunspeakable, wild, Hindoo odor about it, such as may lurk in thevicinity of funereal pyres.
It smells like the left wing of the dayof judgment; it is an argument for the pit.
By midnight the works were in full operation.
We were clear from thecarcase; sail had been made; the wind was freshening; the wild oceandarkness was intense.
But that darkness was licked up by the fierceflames, which at intervals forked forth from the sooty flues, andilluminated every lofty rope in the rigging, as with the famed Greekfire.
The burning ship drove on, as if remorselessly commissioned tosome vengeful deed.
So the pitch and sulphur-freighted brigs of thebold Hydriote, Canaris, issuing from their midnight harbors, withbroad sheets of flame for sails, bore down upon the Turkish frigates,and folded them in conflagrations.
The hatch, removed from the top of the works, now afforded a widehearth in front of them.
Standing on this were the Tartarean shapesof the pagan harpooneers, always the whale-ship's stokers.
With hugepronged poles they pitched hissing masses of blubber into thescalding pots, or stirred up the fires beneath, till the snaky flamesdarted, curling, out of the doors to catch them by the feet.
Thesmoke rolled away in sullen heaps.
To every pitch of the ship therewas a pitch of the boiling oil, which seemed all eagerness to leapinto their faces.
Opposite the mouth of the works, on the furtherside of the wide wooden hearth, was the windlass.
This served for asea-sofa.
Here lounged the watch, when not otherwise employed,looking into the red heat of the fire, till their eyes felt scorchedin their heads.
Their tawny features, now all begrimed with smokeand sweat, their matted beards, and the contrasting barbaricbrilliancy of their teeth, all these were strangely revealed in thecapricious emblazonings of the works.
As they narrated to each othertheir unholy adventures, their tales of terror told in words ofmirth; as their uncivilized laughter forked upwards out of them, likethe flames from the furnace; as to and fro, in their front, theharpooneers wildly gesticulated with their huge pronged forks anddippers; as the wind howled on, and the sea leaped, and the shipgroaned and dived, and yet steadfastly shot her red hell further andfurther into the blackness of the sea and the night, and scornfullychamped the white bone in her mouth, and viciously spat round her onall sides; then the rushing Pequod, freighted with savages, and ladenwith fire, and burning a corpse, and plunging into that blackness ofdarkness, seemed the material counterpart of her monomaniaccommander's soul.
So seemed it to me, as I stood at her helm, and for long hourssilently guided the way of this fire-ship on the sea.
Wrapped, forthat interval, in darkness myself, I but the better saw the redness,the madness, the ghastliness of others.
The continual sight of thefiend shapes before me, capering half in smoke and half in fire,these at last begat kindred visions in my soul, so soon as I began toyield to that unaccountable drowsiness which ever would come over meat a midnight helm.
But that night, in particular, a strange (and ever sinceinexplicable) thing occurred to me.
Starting from a brief standingsleep, I was horribly conscious of something fatally wrong.
Thejaw-bone tiller smote my side, which leaned against it; in my earswas the low hum of sails, just beginning to shake in the wind; Ithought my eyes were open; I was half conscious of putting my fingersto the lids and mechanically stretching them still further apart.
But, spite of all this, I could see no compass before me to steer by;though it seemed but a minute since I had been watching the card, bythe steady binnacle lamp illuminating it.
Nothing seemed before mebut a jet gloom, now and then made ghastly by flashes of redness.
Uppermost was the impression, that whatever swift, rushing thing Istood on was not so much bound to any haven ahead as rushing from allhavens astern.
A stark, bewildered feeling, as of death, came overme.
Convulsively my hands grasped the tiller, but with the crazyconceit that the tiller was, somehow, in some enchanted way,inverted.
My God! what is the matter with me? thought I.
Lo! in mybrief sleep I had turned myself about, and was fronting the ship'sstern, with my back to her prow and the compass.
In an instant Ifaced back, just in time to prevent the vessel from flying up intothe wind, and very probably capsizing her.
How glad and how gratefulthe relief from this unnatural hallucination of the night, and thefatal contingency of being brought by the lee!Look not too long in the face of the fire, O man! Never dream withthy hand on the helm! Turn not thy back to the compass; accept thefirst hint of the hitching tiller; believe not the artificial fire,when its redness makes all things look ghastly.
To-morrow, in thenatural sun, the skies will be bright; those who glared like devilsin the forking flames, the morn will show in far other, at leastgentler, relief; the glorious, golden, glad sun, the only truelamp--all others but liars!Nevertheless the sun hides not Virginia's Dismal Swamp, nor Rome'saccursed Campagna, nor wide Sahara, nor all the millions of miles ofdeserts and of griefs beneath the moon.
The sun hides not the ocean,which is the dark side of this earth, and which is two thirds of thisearth.
So, therefore, that mortal man who hath more of joy thansorrow in him, that mortal man cannot be true--not true, orundeveloped.
With books the same.
The truest of all men was the Manof Sorrows, and the truest of all books is Solomon's, andEcclesiastes is the fine hammered steel of woe.
"All is vanity.
"ALL.
This wilful world hath not got hold of unchristian Solomon'swisdom yet.
But he who dodges hospitals and jails, and walks fastcrossing graveyards, and would rather talk of operas than hell;calls Cowper, Young, Pascal, Rousseau, poor devils all of sick men;and throughout a care-free lifetime swears by Rabelais as passingwise, and therefore jolly;--not that man is fitted to sit down ontomb-stones, and break the green damp mould with unfathomablywondrous Solomon.
But even Solomon, he says, "the man that wandereth out of the way ofunderstanding shall remain" (I.
E.
, even while living) "in thecongregation of the dead.
" Give not thyself up, then, to fire, lestit invert thee, deaden thee; as for the time it did me.
There is awisdom that is woe; but there is a woe that is madness.
And there isa Catskill eagle in some souls that can alike dive down into theblackest gorges, and soar out of them again and become invisible inthe sunny spaces.
And even if he for ever flies within the gorge,that gorge is in the mountains; so that even in his lowest swoop themountain eagle is still higher than other birds upon the plain, eventhough they soar.
The Lamp.
Had you descended from the Pequod's try-works to the Pequod'sforecastle, where the off duty watch were sleeping, for one singlemoment you would have almost thought you were standing in someilluminated shrine of canonized kings and counsellors.
There theylay in their triangular oaken vaults, each mariner a chiselledmuteness; a score of lamps flashing upon his hooded eyes.
In merchantmen, oil for the sailor is more scarce than the milk ofqueens.
To dress in the dark, and eat in the dark, and stumble indarkness to his pallet, this is his usual lot.
But the whaleman, ashe seeks the food of light, so he lives in light.
He makes his berthan Aladdin's lamp, and lays him down in it; so that in the pitchiestnight the ship's black hull still houses an illumination.
See with what entire freedom the whaleman takes his handful oflamps--often but old bottles and vials, though--to the copper coolerat the try-works, and replenishes them there, as mugs of ale at avat.
He burns, too, the purest of oil, in its unmanufactured, and,therefore, unvitiated state; a fluid unknown to solar, lunar, orastral contrivances ashore.
It is sweet as early grass butter inApril.
He goes and hunts for his oil, so as to be sure of itsfreshness and genuineness, even as the traveller on the prairie huntsup his own supper of game.
Stowing Down and Clearing Up.
Already has it been related how the great leviathan is afar offdescried from the mast-head; how he is chased over the watery moors,and slaughtered in the valleys of the deep; how he is then towedalongside and beheaded; and how (on the principle which entitled theheadsman of old to the garments in which the beheaded was killed) hisgreat padded surtout becomes the property of his executioner; how, indue time, he is condemned to the pots, and, like Shadrach, Meshach,and Abednego, his spermaceti, oil, and bone pass unscathed throughthe fire;--but now it remains to conclude the last chapter of thispart of the description by rehearsing--singing, if I may--theromantic proceeding of decanting off his oil into the casks andstriking them down into the hold, where once again leviathan returnsto his native profundities, sliding along beneath the surface asbefore; but, alas! never more to rise and blow.
While still warm, the oil, like hot punch, is received into thesix-barrel casks; and while, perhaps, the ship is pitching androlling this way and that in the midnight sea, the enormous casks areslewed round and headed over, end for end, and sometimes perilouslyscoot across the slippery deck, like so many land slides, till atlast man-handled and stayed in their course; and all round the hoops,rap, rap, go as many hammers as can play upon them, for now, EXOFFICIO, every sailor is a cooper.
At length, when the last pint is casked, and all is cool, then thegreat hatchways are unsealed, the bowels of the ship are thrown open,and down go the casks to their final rest in the sea.
This done, thehatches are replaced, and hermetically closed, like a closet walledup.
In the sperm fishery, this is perhaps one of the most remarkableincidents in all the business of whaling.
One day the planks streamwith freshets of blood and oil; on the sacred quarter-deck enormousmasses of the whale's head are profanely piled; great rusty casks lieabout, as in a brewery yard; the smoke from the try-works hasbesooted all the bulwarks; the mariners go about suffused withunctuousness; the entire ship seems great leviathan himself; while onall hands the din is deafening.
But a day or two after, you look about you, and prick your ears inthis self-same ship; and were it not for the tell-tale boats andtry-works, you would all but swear you trod some silent merchantvessel, with a most scrupulously neat commander.
The unmanufacturedsperm oil possesses a singularly cleansing virtue.
This is thereason why the decks never look so white as just after what they callan affair of oil.
Besides, from the ashes of the burned scraps ofthe whale, a potent lye is readily made; and whenever anyadhesiveness from the back of the whale remains clinging to the side,that lye quickly exterminates it.
Hands go diligently along thebulwarks, and with buckets of water and rags restore them to theirfull tidiness.
The soot is brushed from the lower rigging.
All thenumerous implements which have been in use are likewise faithfullycleansed and put away.
The great hatch is scrubbed and placed uponthe try-works, completely hiding the pots; every cask is out ofsight; all tackles are coiled in unseen nooks; and when by thecombined and simultaneous industry of almost the entire ship'scompany, the whole of this conscientious duty is at last concluded,then the crew themselves proceed to their own ablutions; shiftthemselves from top to toe; and finally issue to the immaculate deck,fresh and all aglow, as bridegrooms new-leaped from out the daintiestHolland.
Now, with elated step, they pace the planks in twos and threes, andhumorously discourse of parlors, sofas, carpets, and fine cambrics;propose to mat the deck; think of having hanging to the top; objectnot to taking tea by moonlight on the piazza of the forecastle.
Tohint to such musked mariners of oil, and bone, and blubber, werelittle short of audacity.
They know not the thing you distantlyallude to.
Away, and bring us napkins!But mark: aloft there, at the three mast heads, stand three menintent on spying out more whales, which, if caught, infallibly willagain soil the old oaken furniture, and drop at least one smallgrease-spot somewhere.
Yes; and many is the time, when, after theseverest uninterrupted labors, which know no night; continuingstraight through for ninety-six hours; when from the boat, where theyhave swelled their wrists with all day rowing on the Line,--they onlystep to the deck to carry vast chains, and heave the heavy windlass,and cut and slash, yea, and in their very sweatings to be smoked andburned anew by the combined fires of the equatorial sun and theequatorial try-works; when, on the heel of all this, they havefinally bestirred themselves to cleanse the ship, and make a spotlessdairy room of it; many is the time the poor fellows, just buttoningthe necks of their clean frocks, are startled by the cry of "Thereshe blows!" and away they fly to fight another whale, and go throughthe whole weary thing again.
Oh! my friends, but this isman-killing! Yet this is life.
For hardly have we mortals by longtoilings extracted from this world's vast bulk its small butvaluable sperm; and then, with weary patience, cleansed ourselvesfrom its defilements, and learned to live here in clean tabernaclesof the soul; hardly is this done, when--THERE SHE BLOWS!--the ghostis spouted up, and away we sail to fight some other world, and gothrough young life's old routine again.
Oh! the metempsychosis! Oh! Pythagoras, that in bright Greece, twothousand years ago, did die, so good, so wise, so mild; I sailed withthee along the Peruvian coast last voyage--and, foolish as I am,taught thee, a green simple boy, how to splice a rope!The Doubloon.
Ere now it has been related how Ahab was wont to pace hisquarter-deck, taking regular turns at either limit, the binnacle andmainmast; but in the multiplicity of other things requiring narrationit has not been added how that sometimes in these walks, when mostplunged in his mood, he was wont to pause in turn at each spot, andstand there strangely eyeing the particular object before him.
Whenhe halted before the binnacle, with his glance fastened on thepointed needle in the compass, that glance shot like a javelin withthe pointed intensity of his purpose; and when resuming his walk heagain paused before the mainmast, then, as the same riveted glancefastened upon the riveted gold coin there, he still wore the sameaspect of nailed firmness, only dashed with a certain wild longing,if not hopefulness.
But one morning, turning to pass the doubloon, he seemed to be newlyattracted by the strange figures and inscriptions stamped on it, asthough now for the first time beginning to interpret for himself insome monomaniac way whatever significance might lurk in them.
Andsome certain significance lurks in all things, else all things arelittle worth, and the round world itself but an empty cipher, exceptto sell by the cartload, as they do hills about Boston, to fill upsome morass in the Milky Way.
Now this doubloon was of purest, virgin gold, raked somewhere out ofthe heart of gorgeous hills, whence, east and west, over goldensands, the head-waters of many a Pactolus flows.
And though nownailed amidst all the rustiness of iron bolts and the verdigris ofcopper spikes, yet, untouchable and immaculate to any foulness, itstill preserved its Quito glow.
Nor, though placed amongst aruthless crew and every hour passed by ruthless hands, and throughthe livelong nights shrouded with thick darkness which might coverany pilfering approach, nevertheless every sunrise found the doubloonwhere the sunset left it last.
For it was set apart and sanctifiedto one awe-striking end; and however wanton in their sailor ways, oneand all, the mariners revered it as the white whale's talisman.
Sometimes they talked it over in the weary watch by night, wonderingwhose it was to be at last, and whether he would ever live to spendit.
Now those noble golden coins of South America are as medals of thesun and tropic token-pieces.
Here palms, alpacas, and volcanoes;sun's disks and stars; ecliptics, horns-of-plenty, and rich bannerswaving, are in luxuriant profusion stamped; so that the precious goldseems almost to derive an added preciousness and enhancing glories,by passing through those fancy mints, so Spanishly poetic.
It so chanced that the doubloon of the Pequod was a most wealthyexample of these things.
On its round border it bore the letters,REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR: QUITO.
So this bright coin came from acountry planted in the middle of the world, and beneath the greatequator, and named after it; and it had been cast midway up theAndes, in the unwaning clime that knows no autumn.
Zoned by thoseletters you saw the likeness of three Andes' summits; from one aflame; a tower on another; on the third a crowing cock; while archingover all was a segment of the partitioned zodiac, the signs allmarked with their usual cabalistics, and the keystone sun enteringthe equinoctial point at Libra.
Before this equatorial coin, Ahab, not unobserved by others, was nowpausing.
"There's something ever egotistical in mountain-tops and towers, andall other grand and lofty things; look here,--three peaks as proud asLucifer.
The firm tower, that is Ahab; the volcano, that is Ahab;the courageous, the undaunted, and victorious fowl, that, too, isAhab; all are Ahab; and this round gold is but the image of therounder globe, which, like a magician's glass, to each and every manin turn but mirrors back his own mysterious self.
Great pains, smallgains for those who ask the world to solve them; it cannot solveitself.
Methinks now this coined sun wears a ruddy face; but see!aye, he enters the sign of storms, the equinox! and but six monthsbefore he wheeled out of a former equinox at Aries! From storm tostorm! So be it, then.
Born in throes, 't is fit that man shouldlive in pains and die in pangs! So be it, then! Here's stout stufffor woe to work on.
So be it, then.
""No fairy fingers can have pressed the gold, but devil's claws must haveleft their mouldings there since yesterday," murmured Starbuck tohimself, leaning against the bulwarks.
"The old man seems to readBelshazzar's awful writing.
I have never marked the coininspectingly.
He goes below; let me read.
A dark valley betweenthree mighty, heaven-abiding peaks, that almost seem the Trinity, insome faint earthly symbol.
So in this vale of Death, God girds usround; and over all our gloom, the sun of Righteousness still shinesa beacon and a hope.
If we bend down our eyes, the dark vale showsher mouldy soil; but if we lift them, the bright sun meets our glancehalf way, to cheer.
Yet, oh, the great sun is no fixture; and if, atmidnight, we would fain snatch some sweet solace from him, we gazefor him in vain! This coin speaks wisely, mildly, truly, but stillsadly to me.
I will quit it, lest Truth shake me falsely.
""There now's the old Mogul," soliloquized Stubb by the try-works,"he's been twigging it; and there goes Starbuck from the same, andboth with faces which I should say might be somewhere within ninefathoms long.
And all from looking at a piece of gold, which did Ihave it now on Negro Hill or in Corlaer's Hook, I'd not look at itvery long ere spending it.
Humph! in my poor, insignificant opinion,I regard this as queer.
I have seen doubloons before now in myvoyagings; your doubloons of old Spain, your doubloons of Peru, yourdoubloons of Chili, your doubloons of Bolivia, your doubloons ofPopayan; with plenty of gold moidores and pistoles, and joes, andhalf joes, and quarter joes.
What then should there be in thisdoubloon of the Equator that is so killing wonderful? By Golconda!let me read it once.
Halloa! here's signs and wonders truly! That,now, is what old Bowditch in his Epitome calls the zodiac, and whatmy almanac below calls ditto.
I'll get the almanac and as I haveheard devils can be raised with Daboll's arithmetic, I'll try my handat raising a meaning out of these queer curvicues here with theMassachusetts calendar.
Here's the book.
Let's see now.
Signs andwonders; and the sun, he's always among 'em.
Hem, hem, hem; herethey are--here they go--all alive:--Aries, or the Ram; Taurus, or theBull and Jimimi! here's Gemini himself, or the Twins.
Well; the sunhe wheels among 'em.
Aye, here on the coin he's just crossing thethreshold between two of twelve sitting-rooms all in a ring.
Book!you lie there; the fact is, you books must know your places.
You'lldo to give us the bare words and facts, but we come in to supply thethoughts.
That's my small experience, so far as the Massachusettscalendar, and Bowditch's navigator, and Daboll's arithmetic go.
Signs and wonders, eh? Pity if there is nothing wonderful in signs,and significant in wonders! There's a clue somewhere; wait a bit;hist--hark! By Jove, I have it! Look you, Doubloon, your zodiachere is the life of man in one round chapter; and now I'll read itoff, straight out of the book.
Come, Almanack! To begin: there'sAries, or the Ram--lecherous dog, he begets us; then, Taurus, or theBull--he bumps us the first thing; then Gemini, or the Twins--thatis, Virtue and Vice; we try to reach Virtue, when lo! comes Cancerthe Crab, and drags us back; and here, going from Virtue, Leo, aroaring Lion, lies in the path--he gives a few fierce bites and surlydabs with his paw; we escape, and hail Virgo, the Virgin! that's ourfirst love; we marry and think to be happy for aye, when pop comesLibra, or the Scales--happiness weighed and found wanting; and whilewe are very sad about that, Lord! how we suddenly jump, as Scorpio,or the Scorpion, stings us in the rear; we are curing the wound, whenwhang come the arrows all round; Sagittarius, or the Archer, isamusing himself.
As we pluck out the shafts, stand aside! here'sthe battering-ram, Capricornus, or the Goat; full tilt, he comesrushing, and headlong we are tossed; when Aquarius, or theWater-bearer, pours out his whole deluge and drowns us; and to windup with Pisces, or the Fishes, we sleep.
There's a sermon now, writin high heaven, and the sun goes through it every year, and yet comesout of it all alive and hearty.
Jollily he, aloft there, wheelsthrough toil and trouble; and so, alow here, does jolly Stubb.
Oh,jolly's the word for aye! Adieu, Doubloon! But stop; here comeslittle King-Post; dodge round the try-works, now, and let's hear whathe'll have to say.
There; he's before it; he'll out with somethingpresently.
So, so; he's beginning.
""I see nothing here, but a round thing made of gold, and whoeverraises a certain whale, this round thing belongs to him.
So, what'sall this staring been about? It is worth sixteen dollars, that'strue; and at two cents the cigar, that's nine hundred and sixtycigars.
I won't smoke dirty pipes like Stubb, but I like cigars, andhere's nine hundred and sixty of them; so here goes Flask aloft tospy 'em out.
""Shall I call that wise or foolish, now; if it be really wise it hasa foolish look to it; yet, if it be really foolish, then has it asort of wiseish look to it.
But, avast; here comes our oldManxman--the old hearse-driver, he must have been, that is, before hetook to the sea.
He luffs up before the doubloon; halloa, and goesround on the other side of the mast; why, there's a horse-shoe nailedon that side; and now he's back again; what does that mean? Hark!he's muttering--voice like an old worn-out coffee-mill.
Prick ears,and listen!""If the White Whale be raised, it must be in a month and a day, whenthe sun stands in some one of these signs.
I've studied signs, andknow their marks; they were taught me two score years ago, by the oldwitch in Copenhagen.
Now, in what sign will the sun then be? Thehorse-shoe sign; for there it is, right opposite the gold.
Andwhat's the horse-shoe sign? The lion is the horse-shoe sign--theroaring and devouring lion.
Ship, old ship! my old head shakes tothink of thee.
""There's another rendering now; but still one text.
All sorts of menin one kind of world, you see.
Dodge again! here comes Queequeg--alltattooing--looks like the signs of the Zodiac himself.
What says theCannibal? As I live he's comparing notes; looking at his thigh bone;thinks the sun is in the thigh, or in the calf, or in the bowels, Isuppose, as the old women talk Surgeon's Astronomy in the backcountry.
And by Jove, he's found something there in the vicinity ofhis thigh--I guess it's Sagittarius, or the Archer.
No: he don'tknow what to make of the doubloon; he takes it for an old button offsome king's trowsers.
But, aside again! here comes that ghost-devil,Fedallah; tail coiled out of sight as usual, oakum in the toes of hispumps as usual.
What does he say, with that look of his? Ah, onlymakes a sign to the sign and bows himself; there is a sun on thecoin--fire worshipper, depend upon it.
Ho! more and more.
This waycomes Pip--poor boy! would he had died, or I; he's half horrible tome.
He too has been watching all of these interpreters--myselfincluded--and look now, he comes to read, with that unearthly idiotface.
Stand away again and hear him.
Hark!""I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.
""Upon my soul, he's been studying Murray's Grammar! Improving hismind, poor fellow! But what's that he says now--hist!""I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.
""Why, he's getting it by heart--hist! again.
""I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.
""Well, that's funny.
""And I, you, and he; and we, ye, and they, are all bats; and I'm acrow, especially when I stand a'top of this pine tree here.
Caw!caw! caw! caw! caw! caw! Ain't I a crow? And where's thescare-crow? There he stands; two bones stuck into a pair of oldtrowsers, and two more poked into the sleeves of an old jacket.
""Wonder if he means me?--complimentary!--poor lad!--I could go hangmyself.
Any way, for the present, I'll quit Pip's vicinity.
I canstand the rest, for they have plain wits; but he's too crazy-wittyfor my sanity.
So, so, I leave him muttering.
""Here's the ship's navel, this doubloon here, and they are all onfire to unscrew it.
But, unscrew your navel, and what's theconsequence? Then again, if it stays here, that is ugly, too, forwhen aught's nailed to the mast it's a sign that things growdesperate.
Ha, ha! old Ahab! the White Whale; he'll nail ye! Thisis a pine tree.
My father, in old Tolland county, cut down a pinetree once, and found a silver ring grown over in it; some olddarkey's wedding ring.
How did it get there? And so they'll say inthe resurrection, when they come to fish up this old mast, and find adoubloon lodged in it, with bedded oysters for the shaggy bark.
Oh,the gold! the precious, precious, gold! the green miser'll hoard yesoon! Hish! hish! God goes 'mong the worlds blackberrying.
Cook!ho, cook! and cook us! Jenny! hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, Jenny, Jenny!and get your hoe-cake done!"Leg and Arm.
The Pequod, of Nantucket, Meets the Samuel Enderby, of London.
"Ship, ahoy! Hast seen the White Whale?"So cried Ahab, once more hailing a ship showing English colours,bearing down under the stern.
Trumpet to mouth, the old man wasstanding in his hoisted quarter-boat, his ivory leg plainly revealedto the stranger captain, who was carelessly reclining in his ownboat's bow.
He was a darkly-tanned, burly, good-natured,fine-looking man, of sixty or thereabouts, dressed in a spaciousroundabout, that hung round him in festoons of blue pilot-cloth; andone empty arm of this jacket streamed behind him like the broideredarm of a hussar's surcoat.
"Hast seen the White Whale!""See you this?" and withdrawing it from the folds that had hiddenit, he held up a white arm of sperm whale bone, terminating in awooden head like a mallet.
"Man my boat!" cried Ahab, impetuously, and tossing about the oarsnear him--"Stand by to lower!"In less than a minute, without quitting his little craft, he and hiscrew were dropped to the water, and were soon alongside of thestranger.
But here a curious difficulty presented itself.
In theexcitement of the moment, Ahab had forgotten that since the loss ofhis leg he had never once stepped on board of any vessel at sea buthis own, and then it was always by an ingenious and very handymechanical contrivance peculiar to the Pequod, and a thing not to berigged and shipped in any other vessel at a moment's warning.
Now,it is no very easy matter for anybody--except those who are almosthourly used to it, like whalemen--to clamber up a ship's side from aboat on the open sea; for the great swells now lift the boat high uptowards the bulwarks, and then instantaneously drop it half way downto the kelson.
So, deprived of one leg, and the strange ship ofcourse being altogether unsupplied with the kindly invention, Ahabnow found himself abjectly reduced to a clumsy landsman again;hopelessly eyeing the uncertain changeful height he could hardly hopeto attain.
It has before been hinted, perhaps, that every little untowardcircumstance that befell him, and which indirectly sprang from hisluckless mishap, almost invariably irritated or exasperated Ahab.
And in the present instance, all this was heightened by the sight ofthe two officers of the strange ship, leaning over the side, by theperpendicular ladder of nailed cleets there, and swinging towards hima pair of tastefully-ornamented man-ropes; for at first they did notseem to bethink them that a one-legged man must be too much of acripple to use their sea bannisters.
But this awkwardness onlylasted a minute, because the strange captain, observing at a glancehow affairs stood, cried out, "I see, I see!--avast heaving there!Jump, boys, and swing over the cutting-tackle.
"As good luck would have it, they had had a whale alongside a day ortwo previous, and the great tackles were still aloft, and the massivecurved blubber-hook, now clean and dry, was still attached to theend.
This was quickly lowered to Ahab, who at once comprehending itall, slid his solitary thigh into the curve of the hook (it was likesitting in the fluke of an anchor, or the crotch of an apple tree),and then giving the word, held himself fast, and at the same timealso helped to hoist his own weight, by pulling hand-over-hand uponone of the running parts of the tackle.
Soon he was carefully swunginside the high bulwarks, and gently landed upon the capstan head.
With his ivory arm frankly thrust forth in welcome, the other captainadvanced, and Ahab, putting out his ivory leg, and crossing the ivoryarm (like two sword-fish blades) cried out in his walrus way, "Aye,aye, hearty! let us shake bones together!--an arm and a leg!--an armthat never can shrink, d'ye see; and a leg that never can run.
Wheredid'st thou see the White Whale?--how long ago?""The White Whale," said the Englishman, pointing his ivory armtowards the East, and taking a rueful sight along it, as if it hadbeen a telescope; "there I saw him, on the Line, last season.
""And he took that arm off, did he?" asked Ahab, now sliding down fromthe capstan, and resting on the Englishman's shoulder, as he did so.
"Aye, he was the cause of it, at least; and that leg, too?""Spin me the yarn," said Ahab; "how was it?""It was the first time in my life that I ever cruised on the Line,"began the Englishman.
"I was ignorant of the White Whale at thattime.
Well, one day we lowered for a pod of four or five whales, andmy boat fastened to one of them; a regular circus horse he was, too,that went milling and milling round so, that my boat's crew couldonly trim dish, by sitting all their sterns on the outer gunwale.
Presently up breaches from the bottom of the sea a bouncing greatwhale, with a milky-white head and hump, all crows' feet andwrinkles.
""It was he, it was he!" cried Ahab, suddenly letting out hissuspended breath.
"And harpoons sticking in near his starboard fin.
""Aye, aye--they were mine--MY irons," cried Ahab, exultingly--"buton!""Give me a chance, then," said the Englishman, good-humoredly.
"Well, this old great-grandfather, with the white head and hump, runsall afoam into the pod, and goes to snapping furiously at myfast-line!"Aye, I see!--wanted to part it; free the fast-fish--an old trick--Iknow him.
""How it was exactly," continued the one-armed commander, "I do notknow; but in biting the line, it got foul of his teeth, caught theresomehow; but we didn't know it then; so that when we afterwardspulled on the line, bounce we came plump on to his hump! instead ofthe other whale's; that went off to windward, all fluking.
Seeinghow matters stood, and what a noble great whale it was--the noblestand biggest I ever saw, sir, in my life--I resolved to capture him,spite of the boiling rage he seemed to be in.
And thinking thehap-hazard line would get loose, or the tooth it was tangled tomight draw (for I have a devil of a boat's crew for a pull on awhale-line); seeing all this, I say, I jumped into my first mate'sboat--Mr.
Mounttop's here (by the way, Captain--Mounttop;Mounttop--the captain);--as I was saying, I jumped into Mounttop'sboat, which, d'ye see, was gunwale and gunwale with mine, then; andsnatching the first harpoon, let this old great-grandfather have it.
But, Lord, look you, sir--hearts and souls alive, man--the nextinstant, in a jiff, I was blind as a bat--both eyes out--all befoggedand bedeadened with black foam--the whale's tail looming straight upout of it, perpendicular in the air, like a marble steeple.
No usesterning all, then; but as I was groping at midday, with a blindingsun, all crown-jewels; as I was groping, I say, after the secondiron, to toss it overboard--down comes the tail like a Lima tower,cutting my boat in two, leaving each half in splinters; and, flukesfirst, the white hump backed through the wreck, as though it was allchips.
We all struck out.
To escape his terrible flailings, Iseized hold of my harpoon-pole sticking in him, and for a momentclung to that like a sucking fish.
But a combing sea dashed me off,and at the same instant, the fish, taking one good dart forwards,went down like a flash; and the barb of that cursed second irontowing along near me caught me here" (clapping his hand just belowhis shoulder); "yes, caught me just here, I say, and bore me down toHell's flames, I was thinking; when, when, all of a sudden, thank thegood God, the barb ript its way along the flesh--clear along thewhole length of my arm--came out nigh my wrist, and up Ifloated;--and that gentleman there will tell you the rest (by theway, captain--Dr.
Bunger, ship's surgeon: Bunger, my lad,--thecaptain).
Now, Bunger boy, spin your part of the yarn.
"The professional gentleman thus familiarly pointed out, had been allthe time standing near them, with nothing specific visible, to denotehis gentlemanly rank on board.
His face was an exceedingly round butsober one; he was dressed in a faded blue woollen frock or shirt, andpatched trowsers; and had thus far been dividing his attentionbetween a marlingspike he held in one hand, and a pill-box held inthe other, occasionally casting a critical glance at the ivory limbsof the two crippled captains.
But, at his superior's introduction ofhim to Ahab, he politely bowed, and straightway went on to do hiscaptain's bidding.
"It was a shocking bad wound," began the whale-surgeon; "and, takingmy advice, Captain Boomer here, stood our old Sammy--""Samuel Enderby is the name of my ship," interrupted the one-armedcaptain, addressing Ahab; "go on, boy.
""Stood our old Sammy off to the northward, to get out of the blazinghot weather there on the Line.
But it was no use--I did all I could;sat up with him nights; was very severe with him in the matter ofdiet--""Oh, very severe!" chimed in the patient himself; then suddenlyaltering his voice, "Drinking hot rum toddies with me every night,till he couldn't see to put on the bandages; and sending me to bed,half seas over, about three o'clock in the morning.
Oh, ye stars! hesat up with me indeed, and was very severe in my diet.
Oh! a greatwatcher, and very dietetically severe, is Dr.
Bunger.
(Bunger, youdog, laugh out! why don't ye? You know you're a precious jollyrascal.
) But, heave ahead, boy, I'd rather be killed by you than keptalive by any other man.
""My captain, you must have ere this perceived, respected sir"--saidthe imperturbable godly-looking Bunger, slightly bowing to Ahab--"isapt to be facetious at times; he spins us many clever things of thatsort.
But I may as well say--en passant, as the French remark--thatI myself--that is to say, Jack Bunger, late of the reverendclergy--am a strict total abstinence man; I never drink--""Water!" cried the captain; "he never drinks it; it's a sort of fitsto him; fresh water throws him into the hydrophobia; but go on--go onwith the arm story.
""Yes, I may as well," said the surgeon, coolly.
"I was aboutobserving, sir, before Captain Boomer's facetious interruption, thatspite of my best and severest endeavors, the wound kept getting worseand worse; the truth was, sir, it was as ugly gaping wound as surgeonever saw; more than two feet and several inches long.
I measured itwith the lead line.
In short, it grew black; I knew what wasthreatened, and off it came.
But I had no hand in shipping thativory arm there; that thing is against all rule"--pointing at it withthe marlingspike--"that is the captain's work, not mine; he orderedthe carpenter to make it; he had that club-hammer there put to theend, to knock some one's brains out with, I suppose, as he tried mineonce.
He flies into diabolical passions sometimes.
Do ye see thisdent, sir"--removing his hat, and brushing aside his hair, andexposing a bowl-like cavity in his skull, but which bore not theslightest scarry trace, or any token of ever having been awound--"Well, the captain there will tell you how that came here;he knows.
""No, I don't," said the captain, "but his mother did; he was bornwith it.
Oh, you solemn rogue, you--you Bunger! was there ever suchanother Bunger in the watery world? Bunger, when you die, you oughtto die in pickle, you dog; you should be preserved to future ages,you rascal.
""What became of the White Whale?" now cried Ahab, who thus far hadbeen impatiently listening to this by-play between the twoEnglishmen.
"Oh!" cried the one-armed captain, "oh, yes! Well; after he sounded,we didn't see him again for some time; in fact, as I before hinted, Ididn't then know what whale it was that had served me such a trick,till some time afterwards, when coming back to the Line, we heardabout Moby Dick--as some call him--and then I knew it was he.
""Did'st thou cross his wake again?""Twice.
""But could not fasten?""Didn't want to try to: ain't one limb enough? What should I dowithout this other arm? And I'm thinking Moby Dick doesn't bite somuch as he swallows.
""Well, then," interrupted Bunger, "give him your left arm for bait toget the right.
Do you know, gentlemen"--very gravely andmathematically bowing to each Captain in succession--"Do you know,gentlemen, that the digestive organs of the whale are so inscrutablyconstructed by Divine Providence, that it is quite impossible for himto completely digest even a man's arm? And he knows it too.
So thatwhat you take for the White Whale's malice is only his awkwardness.
For he never means to swallow a single limb; he only thinks toterrify by feints.
But sometimes he is like the old juggling fellow,formerly a patient of mine in Ceylon, that making believe swallowjack-knives, once upon a time let one drop into him in good earnest,and there it stayed for a twelvemonth or more; when I gave him anemetic, and he heaved it up in small tacks, d'ye see.
No possibleway for him to digest that jack-knife, and fully incorporate it intohis general bodily system.
Yes, Captain Boomer, if you are quickenough about it, and have a mind to pawn one arm for the sake of theprivilege of giving decent burial to the other, why in that casethe arm is yours; only let the whale have another chance at youshortly, that's all.
""No, thank ye, Bunger," said the English Captain, "he's welcome tothe arm he has, since I can't help it, and didn't know him then; butnot to another one.
No more White Whales for me; I've lowered forhim once, and that has satisfied me.
There would be great glory inkilling him, I know that; and there is a ship-load of precious spermin him, but, hark ye, he's best let alone; don't you think so,Captain?"--glancing at the ivory leg.
"He is.
But he will still be hunted, for all that.
What is best letalone, that accursed thing is not always what least allures.
He'sall a magnet! How long since thou saw'st him last? Which wayheading?""Bless my soul, and curse the foul fiend's," cried Bunger, stoopinglywalking round Ahab, and like a dog, strangely snuffing; "this man'sblood--bring the thermometer!--it's at the boiling point!--his pulsemakes these planks beat!--sir!"--taking a lancet from his pocket, anddrawing near to Ahab's arm.
"Avast!" roared Ahab, dashing him against the bulwarks--"Man theboat! Which way heading?""Good God!" cried the English Captain, to whom the question was put.
"What's the matter? He was heading east, I think.
--Is your Captaincrazy?" whispering Fedallah.
But Fedallah, putting a finger on his lip, slid over the bulwarks totake the boat's steering oar, and Ahab, swinging the cutting-tackletowards him, commanded the ship's sailors to stand by to lower.
In a moment he was standing in the boat's stern, and the Manilla menwere springing to their oars.
In vain the English Captain hailedhim.
With back to the stranger ship, and face set like a flint tohis own, Ahab stood upright till alongside of the Pequod.
The Decanter.
Ere the English ship fades from sight, be it set down here, that shehailed from London, and was named after the late Samuel Enderby,merchant of that city, the original of the famous whaling house ofEnderby & Sons; a house which in my poor whaleman's opinion, comesnot far behind the united royal houses of the Tudors and Bourbons, inpoint of real historical interest.
How long, prior to the year ofour Lord 1775, this great whaling house was in existence, my numerousfish-documents do not make plain; but in that year (1775) it fittedout the first English ships that ever regularly hunted the SpermWhale; though for some score of years previous (ever since 1726) ourvaliant Coffins and Maceys of Nantucket and the Vineyard had in largefleets pursued that Leviathan, but only in the North and SouthAtlantic: not elsewhere.
Be it distinctly recorded here, that theNantucketers were the first among mankind to harpoon with civilizedsteel the great Sperm Whale; and that for half a century they werethe only people of the whole globe who so harpooned him.
In 1778, a fine ship, the Amelia, fitted out for the express purpose,and at the sole charge of the vigorous Enderbys, boldly rounded CapeHorn, and was the first among the nations to lower a whale-boat ofany sort in the great South Sea.
The voyage was a skilful and luckyone; and returning to her berth with her hold full of the precioussperm, the Amelia's example was soon followed by other ships, Englishand American, and thus the vast Sperm Whale grounds of the Pacificwere thrown open.
But not content with this good deed, theindefatigable house again bestirred itself: Samuel and all hisSons--how many, their mother only knows--and under their immediateauspices, and partly, I think, at their expense, the Britishgovernment was induced to send the sloop-of-war Rattler on a whalingvoyage of discovery into the South Sea.
Commanded by a navalPost-Captain, the Rattler made a rattling voyage of it, and did someservice; how much does not appear.
But this is not all.
In 1819,the same house fitted out a discovery whale ship of their own, to goon a tasting cruise to the remote waters of Japan.
That ship--wellcalled the "Syren"--made a noble experimental cruise; and it was thusthat the great Japanese Whaling Ground first became generally known.
The Syren in this famous voyage was commanded by a Captain Coffin, aNantucketer.
All honour to the Enderbies, therefore, whose house, I think, existsto the present day; though doubtless the original Samuel must longago have slipped his cable for the great South Sea of the otherworld.
The ship named after him was worthy of the honour, being a very fastsailer and a noble craft every way.
I boarded her once at midnightsomewhere off the Patagonian coast, and drank good flip down in theforecastle.
It was a fine gam we had, and they were alltrumps--every soul on board.
A short life to them, and a jollydeath.
And that fine gam I had--long, very long after old Ahabtouched her planks with his ivory heel--it minds me of the noble,solid, Saxon hospitality of that ship; and may my parson forget me,and the devil remember me, if I ever lose sight of it.
Flip? Did Isay we had flip? Yes, and we flipped it at the rate of ten gallonsthe hour; and when the squall came (for it's squally off there byPatagonia), and all hands--visitors and all--were called to reeftopsails, we were so top-heavy that we had to swing each other aloftin bowlines; and we ignorantly furled the skirts of our jackets intothe sails, so that we hung there, reefed fast in the howling gale, awarning example to all drunken tars.
However, the masts did not gooverboard; and by and by we scrambled down, so sober, that we had topass the flip again, though the savage salt spray bursting down theforecastle scuttle, rather too much diluted and pickled it to mytaste.
The beef was fine--tough, but with body in it.
They said it wasbull-beef; others, that it was dromedary beef; but I do not know, forcertain, how that was.
They had dumplings too; small, butsubstantial, symmetrically globular, and indestructible dumplings.
Ifancied that you could feel them, and roll them about in you afterthey were swallowed.
If you stooped over too far forward, you riskedtheir pitching out of you like billiard-balls.
The bread--but thatcouldn't be helped; besides, it was an anti-scorbutic; in short, thebread contained the only fresh fare they had.
But the forecastle wasnot very light, and it was very easy to step over into a dark cornerwhen you ate it.
But all in all, taking her from truck to helm,considering the dimensions of the cook's boilers, including his ownlive parchment boilers; fore and aft, I say, the Samuel Enderby was ajolly ship; of good fare and plenty; fine flip and strong; crackfellows all, and capital from boot heels to hat-band.
But why was it, think ye, that the Samuel Enderby, and some otherEnglish whalers I know of--not all though--were such famous,hospitable ships; that passed round the beef, and the bread, and thecan, and the joke; and were not soon weary of eating, and drinking,and laughing? I will tell you.
The abounding good cheer of theseEnglish whalers is matter for historical research.
Nor have I beenat all sparing of historical whale research, when it has seemedneeded.
The English were preceded in the whale fishery by the Hollanders,Zealanders, and Danes; from whom they derived many terms still extantin the fishery; and what is yet more, their fat old fashions,touching plenty to eat and drink.
For, as a general thing, theEnglish merchant-ship scrimps her crew; but not so the Englishwhaler.
Hence, in the English, this thing of whaling good cheer isnot normal and natural, but incidental and particular; and,therefore, must have some special origin, which is here pointed out,and will be still further elucidated.
During my researches in the Leviathanic histories, I stumbled upon anancient Dutch volume, which, by the musty whaling smell of it, I knewmust be about whalers.
The title was, "Dan Coopman," wherefore Iconcluded that this must be the invaluable memoirs of some Amsterdamcooper in the fishery, as every whale ship must carry its cooper.
Iwas reinforced in this opinion by seeing that it was the productionof one "Fitz Swackhammer.
" But my friend Dr.
Snodhead, a verylearned man, professor of Low Dutch and High German in the college ofSanta Claus and St.
Pott's, to whom I handed the work fortranslation, giving him a box of sperm candles for his trouble--thissame Dr.
Snodhead, so soon as he spied the book, assured me that "DanCoopman" did not mean "The Cooper," but "The Merchant.
" In short,this ancient and learned Low Dutch book treated of the commerce ofHolland; and, among other subjects, contained a very interestingaccount of its whale fishery.
And in this chapter it was, headed,"Smeer," or "Fat," that I found a long detailed list of the outfitsfor the larders and cellars of 180 sail of Dutch whalemen; from whichlist, as translated by Dr.
Snodhead, I transcribe the following:400,000 lbs.
of beef.
60,000 lbs.
Friesland pork.
150,000 lbs.
of stock fish.
550,000 lbs.
of biscuit.
72,000 lbs.
of soft bread.
2,800 firkins of butter.
20,000 lbs.
Texel & Leyden cheese.
144,000 lbs.
cheese (probably an inferior article).
550 ankers of Geneva.
10,800 barrels of beer.
Most statistical tables are parchingly dry in the reading; not so inthe present case, however, where the reader is flooded with wholepipes, barrels, quarts, and gills of good gin and good cheer.
At the time, I devoted three days to the studious digesting of allthis beer, beef, and bread, during which many profound thoughts wereincidentally suggested to me, capable of a transcendental andPlatonic application; and, furthermore, I compiled supplementarytables of my own, touching the probable quantity of stock-fish, etc.
,consumed by every Low Dutch harpooneer in that ancient Greenland andSpitzbergen whale fishery.
In the first place, the amount of butter,and Texel and Leyden cheese consumed, seems amazing.
I impute it,though, to their naturally unctuous natures, being rendered stillmore unctuous by the nature of their vocation, and especially bytheir pursuing their game in those frigid Polar Seas, on the verycoasts of that Esquimaux country where the convivial natives pledgeeach other in bumpers of train oil.
The quantity of beer, too, is very large, 10,800 barrels.
Now,as those polar fisheries could only be prosecuted in the short summerof that climate, so that the whole cruise of one of these Dutchwhalemen, including the short voyage to and from the Spitzbergen sea,did not much exceed three months, say, and reckoning 30 men to eachof their fleet of 180 sail, we have 5,400 Low Dutch seamen in all;therefore, I say, we have precisely two barrels of beer per man, fora twelve weeks' allowance, exclusive of his fair proportion of that550 ankers of gin.
Now, whether these gin and beer harpooneers, sofuddled as one might fancy them to have been, were the right sort ofmen to stand up in a boat's head, and take good aim at flying whales;this would seem somewhat improbable.
Yet they did aim at them, andhit them too.
But this was very far North, be it remembered, wherebeer agrees well with the constitution; upon the Equator, in oursouthern fishery, beer would be apt to make the harpooneer sleepy atthe mast-head and boozy in his boat; and grievous loss might ensue toNantucket and New Bedford.
But no more; enough has been said to show that the old Dutch whalersof two or three centuries ago were high livers; and that the Englishwhalers have not neglected so excellent an example.
For, say they,when cruising in an empty ship, if you can get nothing better out ofthe world, get a good dinner out of it, at least.
And this emptiesthe decanter.
A Bower in the Arsacides.
Hitherto, in descriptively treating of the Sperm Whale, I havechiefly dwelt upon the marvels of his outer aspect; or separately andin detail upon some few interior structural features.
But to a largeand thorough sweeping comprehension of him, it behooves me now tounbutton him still further, and untagging the points of his hose,unbuckling his garters, and casting loose the hooks and the eyes ofthe joints of his innermost bones, set him before you in hisultimatum; that is to say, in his unconditional skeleton.
But how now, Ishmael? How is it, that you, a mere oarsman in thefishery, pretend to know aught about the subterranean parts of thewhale? Did erudite Stubb, mounted upon your capstan, deliverlectures on the anatomy of the Cetacea; and by help of the windlass,hold up a specimen rib for exhibition? Explain thyself, Ishmael.
Can you land a full-grown whale on your deck for examination, as acook dishes a roast-pig? Surely not.
A veritable witness have youhitherto been, Ishmael; but have a care how you seize the privilegeof Jonah alone; the privilege of discoursing upon the joists andbeams; the rafters, ridge-pole, sleepers, and under-pinnings, makingup the frame-work of leviathan; and belike of the tallow-vats,dairy-rooms, butteries, and cheeseries in his bowels.
I confess, that since Jonah, few whalemen have penetrated very farbeneath the skin of the adult whale; nevertheless, I have beenblessed with an opportunity to dissect him in miniature.
In a ship Ibelonged to, a small cub Sperm Whale was once bodily hoisted to thedeck for his poke or bag, to make sheaths for the barbs of theharpoons, and for the heads of the lances.
Think you I let thatchance go, without using my boat-hatchet and jack-knife, and breakingthe seal and reading all the contents of that young cub?And as for my exact knowledge of the bones of the leviathan in theirgigantic, full grown development, for that rare knowledge I amindebted to my late royal friend Tranquo, king of Tranque, one ofthe Arsacides.
For being at Tranque, years ago, when attached to thetrading-ship Dey of Algiers, I was invited to spend part of theArsacidean holidays with the lord of Tranque, at his retired palmvilla at Pupella; a sea-side glen not very far distant from what oursailors called Bamboo-Town, his capital.
Among many other fine qualities, my royal friend Tranquo, beinggifted with a devout love for all matters of barbaric vertu, hadbrought together in Pupella whatever rare things the more ingeniousof his people could invent; chiefly carved woods of wonderfuldevices, chiselled shells, inlaid spears, costly paddles, aromaticcanoes; and all these distributed among whatever natural wonders, thewonder-freighted, tribute-rendering waves had cast upon his shores.
Chief among these latter was a great Sperm Whale, which, after anunusually long raging gale, had been found dead and stranded, withhis head against a cocoa-nut tree, whose plumage-like, tufteddroopings seemed his verdant jet.
When the vast body had at lastbeen stripped of its fathom-deep enfoldings, and the bones becomedust dry in the sun, then the skeleton was carefully transported upthe Pupella glen, where a grand temple of lordly palms now shelteredit.
The ribs were hung with trophies; the vertebrae were carved withArsacidean annals, in strange hieroglyphics; in the skull, thepriests kept up an unextinguished aromatic flame, so that the mystichead again sent forth its vapoury spout; while, suspended from abough, the terrific lower jaw vibrated over all the devotees, likethe hair-hung sword that so affrighted Damocles.
It was a wondrous sight.
The wood was green as mosses of the IcyGlen; the trees stood high and haughty, feeling their living sap; theindustrious earth beneath was as a weaver's loom, with a gorgeouscarpet on it, whereof the ground-vine tendrils formed the warp andwoof, and the living flowers the figures.
All the trees, with alltheir laden branches; all the shrubs, and ferns, and grasses; themessage-carrying air; all these unceasingly were active.
Through thelacings of the leaves, the great sun seemed a flying shuttle weavingthe unwearied verdure.
Oh, busy weaver! unseen weaver!--pause!--oneword!--whither flows the fabric? what palace may it deck? whereforeall these ceaseless toilings? Speak, weaver!--stay thy hand!--butone single word with thee! Nay--the shuttle flies--the figures floatfrom forth the loom; the freshet-rushing carpet for ever slidesaway.
The weaver-god, he weaves; and by that weaving is he deafened,that he hears no mortal voice; and by that humming, we, too, who lookon the loom are deafened; and only when we escape it shall we hearthe thousand voices that speak through it.
For even so it is in allmaterial factories.
The spoken words that are inaudible among theflying spindles; those same words are plainly heard without thewalls, bursting from the opened casements.
Thereby have villainiesbeen detected.
Ah, mortal! then, be heedful; for so, in all this dinof the great world's loom, thy subtlest thinkings may be overheardafar.
Now, amid the green, life-restless loom of that Arsacidean wood, thegreat, white, worshipped skeleton lay lounging--a gigantic idler!Yet, as the ever-woven verdant warp and woof intermixed and hummedaround him, the mighty idler seemed the cunning weaver; himself allwoven over with the vines; every month assuming greener, fresherverdure; but himself a skeleton.
Life folded Death; Death trellisedLife; the grim god wived with youthful Life, and begat himcurly-headed glories.
Now, when with royal Tranquo I visited this wondrous whale, and sawthe skull an altar, and the artificial smoke ascending from where thereal jet had issued, I marvelled that the king should regard a chapelas an object of vertu.
He laughed.
But more I marvelled that thepriests should swear that smoky jet of his was genuine.
To and fro Ipaced before this skeleton--brushed the vines aside--broke throughthe ribs--and with a ball of Arsacidean twine, wandered, eddied longamid its many winding, shaded colonnades and arbours.
But soon myline was out; and following it back, I emerged from the opening where Ientered.
I saw no living thing within; naught was there but bones.
Cutting me a green measuring-rod, I once more dived within theskeleton.
From their arrow-slit in the skull, the priests perceivedme taking the altitude of the final rib, "How now!" they shouted;"Dar'st thou measure this our god! That's for us.
" "Aye,priests--well, how long do ye make him, then?" But hereupon a fiercecontest rose among them, concerning feet and inches; they crackedeach other's sconces with their yard-sticks--the great skullechoed--and seizing that lucky chance, I quickly concluded my ownadmeasurements.
These admeasurements I now propose to set before you.
But first, beit recorded, that, in this matter, I am not free to utter any fanciedmeasurement I please.
Because there are skeleton authorities youcan refer to, to test my accuracy.
There is a Leviathanic Museum,they tell me, in Hull, England, one of the whaling ports of thatcountry, where they have some fine specimens of fin-backs and otherwhales.
Likewise, I have heard that in the museum of Manchester, inNew Hampshire, they have what the proprietors call "the only perfectspecimen of a Greenland or River Whale in the United States.
"Moreover, at a place in Yorkshire, England, Burton Constable by name,a certain Sir Clifford Constable has in his possession the skeletonof a Sperm Whale, but of moderate size, by no means of the full-grownmagnitude of my friend King Tranquo's.
In both cases, the stranded whales to which these two skeletonsbelonged, were originally claimed by their proprietors upon similargrounds.
King Tranquo seizing his because he wanted it; and SirClifford, because he was lord of the seignories of those parts.
SirClifford's whale has been articulated throughout; so that, like agreat chest of drawers, you can open and shut him, in all his bonycavities--spread out his ribs like a gigantic fan--and swing all dayupon his lower jaw.
Locks are to be put upon some of his trap-doorsand shutters; and a footman will show round future visitors with abunch of keys at his side.
Sir Clifford thinks of charging twopencefor a peep at the whispering gallery in the spinal column; threepenceto hear the echo in the hollow of his cerebellum; and sixpence forthe unrivalled view from his forehead.
The skeleton dimensions I shall now proceed to set down are copiedverbatim from my right arm, where I had them tattooed; as in my wildwanderings at that period, there was no other secure way ofpreserving such valuable statistics.
But as I was crowded for space,and wished the other parts of my body to remain a blank page for apoem I was then composing--at least, what untattooed parts mightremain--I did not trouble myself with the odd inches; nor, indeed,should inches at all enter into a congenial admeasurement of thewhale.
Measurement of The Whale's Skeleton.
In the first place, I wish to lay before you a particular, plainstatement, touching the living bulk of this leviathan, whose skeletonwe are briefly to exhibit.
Such a statement may prove useful here.
According to a careful calculation I have made, and which I partlybase upon Captain Scoresby's estimate, of seventy tons for thelargest sized Greenland whale of sixty feet in length; according tomy careful calculation, I say, a Sperm Whale of the largestmagnitude, between eighty-five and ninety feet in length, andsomething less than forty feet in its fullest circumference, such awhale will weigh at least ninety tons; so that, reckoning thirteenmen to a ton, he would considerably outweigh the combined populationof a whole village of one thousand one hundred inhabitants.
Think you not then that brains, like yoked cattle, should be put tothis leviathan, to make him at all budge to any landsman'simagination?Having already in various ways put before you his skull, spout-hole,jaw, teeth, tail, forehead, fins, and divers other parts, I shall nowsimply point out what is most interesting in the general bulk of hisunobstructed bones.
But as the colossal skull embraces so very largea proportion of the entire extent of the skeleton; as it is by farthe most complicated part; and as nothing is to be repeatedconcerning it in this chapter, you must not fail to carry it in yourmind, or under your arm, as we proceed, otherwise you will not gain acomplete notion of the general structure we are about to view.
In length, the Sperm Whale's skeleton at Tranque measured seventy-twoFeet; so that when fully invested and extended in life, he must havebeen ninety feet long; for in the whale, the skeleton loses about onefifth in length compared with the living body.
Of this seventy-twofeet, his skull and jaw comprised some twenty feet, leaving somefifty feet of plain back-bone.
Attached to this back-bone, forsomething less than a third of its length, was the mighty circularbasket of ribs which once enclosed his vitals.
To me this vast ivory-ribbed chest, with the long, unrelieved spine,extending far away from it in a straight line, not a little resembledthe hull of a great ship new-laid upon the stocks, when only sometwenty of her naked bow-ribs are inserted, and the keel is otherwise,for the time, but a long, disconnected timber.
The ribs were ten on a side.
The first, to begin from the neck, wasnearly six feet long; the second, third, and fourth were eachsuccessively longer, till you came to the climax of the fifth, or oneof the middle ribs, which measured eight feet and some inches.
Fromthat part, the remaining ribs diminished, till the tenth and lastonly spanned five feet and some inches.
In general thickness, theyall bore a seemly correspondence to their length.
The middle ribswere the most arched.
In some of the Arsacides they are used forbeams whereon to lay footpath bridges over small streams.
In considering these ribs, I could not but be struck anew with thecircumstance, so variously repeated in this book, that the skeletonof the whale is by no means the mould of his invested form.
Thelargest of the Tranque ribs, one of the middle ones, occupied thatpart of the fish which, in life, is greatest in depth.
Now, thegreatest depth of the invested body of this particular whale musthave been at least sixteen feet; whereas, the corresponding ribmeasured but little more than eight feet.
So that this rib onlyconveyed half of the true notion of the living magnitude of thatpart.
Besides, for some way, where I now saw but a naked spine, allthat had been once wrapped round with tons of added bulk in flesh,muscle, blood, and bowels.
Still more, for the ample fins, I heresaw but a few disordered joints; and in place of the weighty andmajestic, but boneless flukes, an utter blank!How vain and foolish, then, thought I, for timid untravelled man totry to comprehend aright this wondrous whale, by merely poring overhis dead attenuated skeleton, stretched in this peaceful wood.
No.
Only in the heart of quickest perils; only when within the eddyingsof his angry flukes; only on the profound unbounded sea, can thefully invested whale be truly and livingly found out.
But the spine.
For that, the best way we can consider it is, with acrane, to pile its bones high up on end.
No speedy enterprise.
Butnow it's done, it looks much like Pompey's Pillar.
There are forty and odd vertebrae in all, which in the skeleton arenot locked together.
They mostly lie like the great knobbed blockson a Gothic spire, forming solid courses of heavy masonry.
Thelargest, a middle one, is in width something less than three feet,and in depth more than four.
The smallest, where the spine tapersaway into the tail, is only two inches in width, and looks somethinglike a white billiard-ball.
I was told that there were still smallerones, but they had been lost by some little cannibal urchins, thepriest's children, who had stolen them to play marbles with.
Thus wesee how that the spine of even the hugest of living things tapers offat last into simple child's play.
The Fossil Whale.
From his mighty bulk the whale affords a most congenial theme whereonto enlarge, amplify, and generally expatiate.
Would you, you couldnot compress him.
By good rights he should only be treated of inimperial folio.
Not to tell over again his furlongs from spiracle totail, and the yards he measures about the waist; only think of thegigantic involutions of his intestines, where they lie in him likegreat cables and hawsers coiled away in the subterranean orlop-deckof a line-of-battle-ship.
Since I have undertaken to manhandle this Leviathan, it behooves meto approve myself omnisciently exhaustive in the enterprise; notoverlooking the minutest seminal germs of his blood, and spinning himout to the uttermost coil of his bowels.
Having already describedhim in most of his present habitatory and anatomical peculiarities,it now remains to magnify him in an archaeological, fossiliferous,and antediluvian point of view.
Applied to any other creature thanthe Leviathan--to an ant or a flea--such portly terms might justly bedeemed unwarrantably grandiloquent.
But when Leviathan is the text,the case is altered.
Fain am I to stagger to this emprise underthe weightiest words of the dictionary.
And here be it said, thatwhenever it has been convenient to consult one in the course of thesedissertations, I have invariably used a huge quarto edition ofJohnson, expressly purchased for that purpose; because that famouslexicographer's uncommon personal bulk more fitted him to compile alexicon to be used by a whale author like me.
One often hears of writers that rise and swell with their subject,though it may seem but an ordinary one.
How, then, with me, writingof this Leviathan? Unconsciously my chirography expands into placardcapitals.
Give me a condor's quill! Give me Vesuvius' crater for aninkstand! Friends, hold my arms! For in the mere act of penning mythoughts of this Leviathan, they weary me, and make me faint withtheir outreaching comprehensiveness of sweep, as if to include thewhole circle of the sciences, and all the generations of whales, andmen, and mastodons, past, present, and to come, with all therevolving panoramas of empire on earth, and throughout the wholeuniverse, not excluding its suburbs.
Such, and so magnifying, is thevirtue of a large and liberal theme! We expand to its bulk.
Toproduce a mighty book, you must choose a mighty theme.
No great andenduring volume can ever be written on the flea, though many there bewho have tried it.
Ere entering upon the subject of Fossil Whales, I present mycredentials as a geologist, by stating that in my miscellaneous timeI have been a stone-mason, and also a great digger of ditches,canals and wells, wine-vaults, cellars, and cisterns of all sorts.
Likewise, by way of preliminary, I desire to remind the reader, thatwhile in the earlier geological strata there are found the fossils ofmonsters now almost completely extinct; the subsequent relicsdiscovered in what are called the Tertiary formations seem theconnecting, or at any rate intercepted links, between theantichronical creatures, and those whose remote posterity are said tohave entered the Ark; all the Fossil Whales hitherto discoveredbelong to the Tertiary period, which is the last preceding thesuperficial formations.
And though none of them precisely answer toany known species of the present time, they are yet sufficiently akinto them in general respects, to justify their taking rank asCetacean fossils.
Detached broken fossils of pre-adamite whales, fragments of theirbones and skeletons, have within thirty years past, at variousintervals, been found at the base of the Alps, in Lombardy, inFrance, in England, in Scotland, and in the States of Louisiana,Mississippi, and Alabama.
Among the more curious of such remains ispart of a skull, which in the year 1779 was disinterred in the RueDauphine in Paris, a short street opening almost directly upon thepalace of the Tuileries; and bones disinterred in excavating thegreat docks of Antwerp, in Napoleon's time.
Cuvier pronounced thesefragments to have belonged to some utterly unknown Leviathanicspecies.
But by far the most wonderful of all Cetacean relics was the almostcomplete vast skeleton of an extinct monster, found in the year 1842,on the plantation of Judge Creagh, in Alabama.
The awe-strickencredulous slaves in the vicinity took it for the bones of one of thefallen angels.
The Alabama doctors declared it a huge reptile, andbestowed upon it the name of Basilosaurus.
But some specimen bonesof it being taken across the sea to Owen, the English Anatomist, itturned out that this alleged reptile was a whale, though of adeparted species.
A significant illustration of the fact, again andagain repeated in this book, that the skeleton of the whale furnishesbut little clue to the shape of his fully invested body.
So Owenrechristened the monster Zeuglodon; and in his paper read before theLondon Geological Society, pronounced it, in substance, one of themost extraordinary creatures which the mutations of the globe haveblotted out of existence.
When I stand among these mighty Leviathan skeletons, skulls, tusks,jaws, ribs, and vertebrae, all characterized by partial resemblancesto the existing breeds of sea-monsters; but at the same time bearingon the other hand similar affinities to the annihilated antichronicalLeviathans, their incalculable seniors; I am, by a flood, borne backto that wondrous period, ere time itself can be said to have begun;for time began with man.
Here Saturn's grey chaos rolls over me, andI obtain dim, shuddering glimpses into those Polar eternities; whenwedged bastions of ice pressed hard upon what are now the Tropics;and in all the 25,000 miles of this world's circumference, not aninhabitable hand's breadth of land was visible.
Then the whole worldwas the whale's; and, king of creation, he left his wake along thepresent lines of the Andes and the Himmalehs.
Who can show apedigree like Leviathan? Ahab's harpoon had shed older blood thanthe Pharaoh's.
Methuselah seems a school-boy.
I look round to shakehands with Shem.
I am horror-struck at this antemosaic, unsourcedexistence of the unspeakable terrors of the whale, which, having beenbefore all time, must needs exist after all humane ages are over.
But not alone has this Leviathan left his pre-adamite traces in thestereotype plates of nature, and in limestone and marl bequeathed hisancient bust; but upon Egyptian tablets, whose antiquity seems toclaim for them an almost fossiliferous character, we find theunmistakable print of his fin.
In an apartment of the great templeof Denderah, some fifty years ago, there was discovered upon thegranite ceiling a sculptured and painted planisphere, abounding incentaurs, griffins, and dolphins, similar to the grotesque figureson the celestial globe of the moderns.
Gliding among them, oldLeviathan swam as of yore; was there swimming in that planisphere,centuries before Solomon was cradled.
Nor must there be omitted another strange attestation of theantiquity of the whale, in his own osseous post-diluvian reality, asset down by the venerable John Leo, the old Barbary traveller.
"Not far from the Sea-side, they have a Temple, the Rafters and Beamsof which are made of Whale-Bones; for Whales of a monstrous size areoftentimes cast up dead upon that shore.
The Common People imagine,that by a secret Power bestowed by God upon the temple, no Whale canpass it without immediate death.
But the truth of the Matter is,that on either side of the Temple, there are Rocks that shoot twoMiles into the Sea, and wound the Whales when they light upon 'em.
They keep a Whale's Rib of an incredible length for a Miracle, whichlying upon the Ground with its convex part uppermost, makes an Arch,the Head of which cannot be reached by a Man upon a Camel's Back.
This Rib (says John Leo) is said to have layn there a hundred Yearsbefore I saw it.
Their Historians affirm, that a Prophet whoprophesy'd of Mahomet, came from this Temple, and some do not standto assert, that the Prophet Jonas was cast forth by the Whale at theBase of the Temple.
"In this Afric Temple of the Whale I leave you, reader, and if you bea Nantucketer, and a whaleman, you will silently worship there.
Does the Whale's Magnitude Diminish?--Will He Perish?Inasmuch, then, as this Leviathan comes floundering down upon us fromthe head-waters of the Eternities, it may be fitly inquired, whether,in the long course of his generations, he has not degenerated fromthe original bulk of his sires.
But upon investigation we find, that not only are the whales of thepresent day superior in magnitude to those whose fossil remains arefound in the Tertiary system (embracing a distinct geological periodprior to man), but of the whales found in that Tertiary system, thosebelonging to its latter formations exceed in size those of itsearlier ones.
Of all the pre-adamite whales yet exhumed, by far the largest is theAlabama one mentioned in the last chapter, and that was less thanseventy feet in length in the skeleton.
Whereas, we have alreadyseen, that the tape-measure gives seventy-two feet for the skeletonof a large sized modern whale.
And I have heard, on whalemen'sauthority, that Sperm Whales have been captured near a hundred feetlong at the time of capture.
But may it not be, that while the whales of the present hour are anadvance in magnitude upon those of all previous geological periods;may it not be, that since Adam's time they have degenerated?Assuredly, we must conclude so, if we are to credit the accounts ofsuch gentlemen as Pliny, and the ancient naturalists generally.
ForPliny tells us of Whales that embraced acres of living bulk, andAldrovandus of others which measured eight hundred feet inlength--Rope Walks and Thames Tunnels of Whales! And even in thedays of Banks and Solander, Cooke's naturalists, we find a Danishmember of the Academy of Sciences setting down certain Iceland Whales(reydan-siskur, or Wrinkled Bellies) at one hundred and twenty yards;that is, three hundred and sixty feet.
And Lacepede, the Frenchnaturalist, in his elaborate history of whales, in the very beginningof his work (page 3), sets down the Right Whale at one hundredmetres, three hundred and twenty-eight feet.
And this work waspublished so late as A.
D.
1825.
But will any whaleman believe these stories? No.
The whale ofto-day is as big as his ancestors in Pliny's time.
And if ever I gowhere Pliny is, I, a whaleman (more than he was), will make bold totell him so.
Because I cannot understand how it is, that while theEgyptian mummies that were buried thousands of years before evenPliny was born, do not measure so much in their coffins as a modernKentuckian in his socks; and while the cattle and other animalssculptured on the oldest Egyptian and Nineveh tablets, by therelative proportions in which they are drawn, just as plainly provethat the high-bred, stall-fed, prize cattle of Smithfield, not onlyequal, but far exceed in magnitude the fattest of Pharaoh's fat kine;in the face of all this, I will not admit that of all animals thewhale alone should have degenerated.
But still another inquiry remains; one often agitated by the morerecondite Nantucketers.
Whether owing to the almost omniscientlook-outs at the mast-heads of the whaleships, now penetrating eventhrough Behring's straits, and into the remotest secret drawers andlockers of the world; and the thousand harpoons and lances dartedalong all continental coasts; the moot point is, whether Leviathancan long endure so wide a chase, and so remorseless a havoc; whetherhe must not at last be exterminated from the waters, and the lastwhale, like the last man, smoke his last pipe, and then himselfevaporate in the final puff.
Comparing the humped herds of whales with the humped herds ofbuffalo, which, not forty years ago, overspread by tens of thousandsthe prairies of Illinois and Missouri, and shook their iron manes andscowled with their thunder-clotted brows upon the sites of populousriver-capitals, where now the polite broker sells you land at adollar an inch; in such a comparison an irresistible argument wouldseem furnished, to show that the hunted whale cannot now escapespeedy extinction.
But you must look at this matter in every light.
Though so short aperiod ago--not a good lifetime--the census of the buffalo inIllinois exceeded the census of men now in London, and though at thepresent day not one horn or hoof of them remains in all that region;and though the cause of this wondrous extermination was the spear ofman; yet the far different nature of the whale-hunt peremptorilyforbids so inglorious an end to the Leviathan.
Forty men in one shiphunting the Sperm Whales for forty-eight months think they have doneextremely well, and thank God, if at last they carry home the oil offorty fish.
Whereas, in the days of the old Canadian and Indianhunters and trappers of the West, when the far west (in whose sunsetsuns still rise) was a wilderness and a virgin, the same number ofmoccasined men, for the same number of months, mounted on horseinstead of sailing in ships, would have slain not forty, but fortythousand and more buffaloes; a fact that, if need were, could bestatistically stated.
Nor, considered aright, does it seem any argument in favour of thegradual extinction of the Sperm Whale, for example, that in formeryears (the latter part of the last century, say) these Leviathans, insmall pods, were encountered much oftener than at present, and, inconsequence, the voyages were not so prolonged, and were also muchmore remunerative.
Because, as has been elsewhere noticed, thosewhales, influenced by some views to safety, now swim the seas inimmense caravans, so that to a large degree the scattered solitaries,yokes, and pods, and schools of other days are now aggregated intovast but widely separated, unfrequent armies.
That is all.
Andequally fallacious seems the conceit, that because the so-calledwhale-bone whales no longer haunt many grounds in former yearsabounding with them, hence that species also is declining.
For theyare only being driven from promontory to cape; and if one coast is nolonger enlivened with their jets, then, be sure, some other andremoter strand has been very recently startled by the unfamiliarspectacle.
Furthermore: concerning these last mentioned Leviathans, they havetwo firm fortresses, which, in all human probability, will for everremain impregnable.
And as upon the invasion of their valleys, thefrosty Swiss have retreated to their mountains; so, hunted from thesavannas and glades of the middle seas, the whale-bone whales can atlast resort to their Polar citadels, and diving under the ultimateglassy barriers and walls there, come up among icy fields and floes;and in a charmed circle of everlasting December, bid defiance to allpursuit from man.
But as perhaps fifty of these whale-bone whales are harpooned for onecachalot, some philosophers of the forecastle have concluded thatthis positive havoc has already very seriously diminished theirbattalions.
But though for some time past a number of these whales,not less than 13,000, have been annually slain on the nor'-westcoast by the Americans alone; yet there are considerations whichrender even this circumstance of little or no account as an opposingargument in this matter.
Natural as it is to be somewhat incredulous concerning thepopulousness of the more enormous creatures of the globe, yet whatshall we say to Harto, the historian of Goa, when he tells us that atone hunting the King of Siam took 4,000 elephants; that in thoseregions elephants are numerous as droves of cattle in the temperateclimes.
And there seems no reason to doubt that if these elephants,which have now been hunted for thousands of years, by Semiramis, byPorus, by Hannibal, and by all the successive monarchs of theEast--if they still survive there in great numbers, much more may thegreat whale outlast all hunting, since he has a pasture to expatiatein, which is precisely twice as large as all Asia, both Americas,Europe and Africa, New Holland, and all the Isles of the seacombined.
Moreover: we are to consider, that from the presumed great longevityof whales, their probably attaining the age of a century and more,therefore at any one period of time, several distinct adultgenerations must be contemporary.
And what that is, we may soongain some idea of, by imagining all the grave-yards, cemeteries, andfamily vaults of creation yielding up the live bodies of all the men,women, and children who were alive seventy-five years ago; and addingthis countless host to the present human population of the globe.
Wherefore, for all these things, we account the whale immortal in hisspecies, however perishable in his individuality.
He swam the seasbefore the continents broke water; he once swam over the site of theTuileries, and Windsor Castle, and the Kremlin.
In Noah's flood hedespised Noah's Ark; and if ever the world is to be again flooded,like the Netherlands, to kill off its rats, then the eternal whalewill still survive, and rearing upon the topmost crest of theequatorial flood, spout his frothed defiance to the skies.
Ahab's Leg.
The precipitating manner in which Captain Ahab had quitted the SamuelEnderby of London, had not been unattended with some small violenceto his own person.
He had lighted with such energy upon a thwart ofhis boat that his ivory leg had received a half-splintering shock.
And when after gaining his own deck, and his own pivot-hole there, heso vehemently wheeled round with an urgent command to the steersman(it was, as ever, something about his not steering inflexiblyenough); then, the already shaken ivory received such an additionaltwist and wrench, that though it still remained entire, and to allappearances lusty, yet Ahab did not deem it entirely trustworthy.
And, indeed, it seemed small matter for wonder, that for all hispervading, mad recklessness, Ahab did at times give careful heed tothe condition of that dead bone upon which he partly stood.
For ithad not been very long prior to the Pequod's sailing from Nantucket,that he had been found one night lying prone upon the ground, andinsensible; by some unknown, and seemingly inexplicable, unimaginablecasualty, his ivory limb having been so violently displaced, that ithad stake-wise smitten, and all but pierced his groin; nor was itwithout extreme difficulty that the agonizing wound was entirelycured.
Nor, at the time, had it failed to enter his monomaniac mind, thatall the anguish of that then present suffering was but the directissue of a former woe; and he too plainly seemed to see, that as themost poisonous reptile of the marsh perpetuates his kind asinevitably as the sweetest songster of the grove; so, equally withevery felicity, all miserable events do naturally beget their like.
Yea, more than equally, thought Ahab; since both the ancestry andposterity of Grief go further than the ancestry and posterity of Joy.
For, not to hint of this: that it is an inference from certaincanonic teachings, that while some natural enjoyments here shall haveno children born to them for the other world, but, on the contrary,shall be followed by the joy-childlessness of all hell's despair;whereas, some guilty mortal miseries shall still fertilely beget tothemselves an eternally progressive progeny of griefs beyond thegrave; not at all to hint of this, there still seems an inequality inthe deeper analysis of the thing.
For, thought Ahab, while even thehighest earthly felicities ever have a certain unsignifying pettinesslurking in them, but, at bottom, all heartwoes, a mysticsignificance, and, in some men, an archangelic grandeur; so do theirdiligent tracings-out not belie the obvious deduction.
To trail thegenealogies of these high mortal miseries, carries us at last amongthe sourceless primogenitures of the gods; so that, in the face ofall the glad, hay-making suns, and soft cymballing, roundharvest-moons, we must needs give in to this: that the godsthemselves are not for ever glad.
The ineffaceable, sad birth-markin the brow of man, is but the stamp of sorrow in the signers.
Unwittingly here a secret has been divulged, which perhaps might moreproperly, in set way, have been disclosed before.
With many otherparticulars concerning Ahab, always had it remained a mystery tosome, why it was, that for a certain period, both before and afterthe sailing of the Pequod, he had hidden himself away with suchGrand-Lama-like exclusiveness; and, for that one interval, soughtspeechless refuge, as it were, among the marble senate of the dead.
Captain Peleg's bruited reason for this thing appeared by no meansadequate; though, indeed, as touching all Ahab's deeper part, everyrevelation partook more of significant darkness than of explanatorylight.
But, in the end, it all came out; this one matter did, atleast.
That direful mishap was at the bottom of his temporaryrecluseness.
And not only this, but to that ever-contracting,dropping circle ashore, who, for any reason, possessed the privilegeof a less banned approach to him; to that timid circle the abovehinted casualty--remaining, as it did, moodily unaccounted for byAhab--invested itself with terrors, not entirely underived from theland of spirits and of wails.
So that, through their zeal for him,they had all conspired, so far as in them lay, to muffle up theknowledge of this thing from others; and hence it was, that not tilla considerable interval had elapsed, did it transpire upon thePequod's decks.
But be all this as it may; let the unseen, ambiguous synod in theair, or the vindictive princes and potentates of fire, have to do ornot with earthly Ahab, yet, in this present matter of his leg, hetook plain practical procedures;--he called the carpenter.
And when that functionary appeared before him, he bade him withoutdelay set about making a new leg, and directed the mates to see himsupplied with all the studs and joists of jaw-ivory (Sperm Whale)which had thus far been accumulated on the voyage, in order that acareful selection of the stoutest, clearest-grained stuff might besecured.
This done, the carpenter received orders to have the legcompleted that night; and to provide all the fittings for it,independent of those pertaining to the distrusted one in use.
Moreover, the ship's forge was ordered to be hoisted out of itstemporary idleness in the hold; and, to accelerate the affair, theblacksmith was commanded to proceed at once to the forging ofwhatever iron contrivances might be needed.
The Carpenter.
Seat thyself sultanically among the moons of Saturn, and take highabstracted man alone; and he seems a wonder, a grandeur, and a woe.
But from the same point, take mankind in mass, and for the most part,they seem a mob of unnecessary duplicates, both contemporary andhereditary.
But most humble though he was, and far from furnishingan example of the high, humane abstraction; the Pequod's carpenterwas no duplicate; hence, he now comes in person on this stage.
Like all sea-going ship carpenters, and more especially thosebelonging to whaling vessels, he was, to a certain off-handed,practical extent, alike experienced in numerous trades and callingscollateral to his own; the carpenter's pursuit being the ancient andoutbranching trunk of all those numerous handicrafts which more orless have to do with wood as an auxiliary material.
But, besides theapplication to him of the generic remark above, this carpenter of thePequod was singularly efficient in those thousand nameless mechanicalemergencies continually recurring in a large ship, upon a three orfour years' voyage, in uncivilized and far-distant seas.
For not tospeak of his readiness in ordinary duties:--repairing stove boats,sprung spars, reforming the shape of clumsy-bladed oars, insertingbull's eyes in the deck, or new tree-nails in the side planks, andother miscellaneous matters more directly pertaining to his specialbusiness; he was moreover unhesitatingly expert in all manner ofconflicting aptitudes, both useful and capricious.
The one grand stage where he enacted all his various parts somanifold, was his vice-bench; a long rude ponderous table furnishedwith several vices, of different sizes, and both of iron and of wood.
At all times except when whales were alongside, this bench wassecurely lashed athwartships against the rear of the Try-works.
A belaying pin is found too large to be easily inserted into itshole: the carpenter claps it into one of his ever-ready vices, andstraightway files it smaller.
A lost land-bird of strange plumagestrays on board, and is made a captive: out of clean shaved rods ofright-whale bone, and cross-beams of sperm whale ivory, the carpentermakes a pagoda-looking cage for it.
An oarsman sprains his wrist:the carpenter concocts a soothing lotion.
Stubb longed forvermillion stars to be painted upon the blade of his every oar;screwing each oar in his big vice of wood, the carpentersymmetrically supplies the constellation.
A sailor takes a fancy towear shark-bone ear-rings: the carpenter drills his ears.
Anotherhas the toothache: the carpenter out pincers, and clapping one handupon his bench bids him be seated there; but the poor fellowunmanageably winces under the unconcluded operation; whirling roundthe handle of his wooden vice, the carpenter signs him to clap hisjaw in that, if he would have him draw the tooth.
Thus, this carpenter was prepared at all points, and alikeindifferent and without respect in all.
Teeth he accounted bits ofivory; heads he deemed but top-blocks; men themselves he lightly heldfor capstans.
But while now upon so wide a field thus variouslyaccomplished and with such liveliness of expertness in him, too; allthis would seem to argue some uncommon vivacity of intelligence.
Butnot precisely so.
For nothing was this man more remarkable, than fora certain impersonal stolidity as it were; impersonal, I say; for itso shaded off into the surrounding infinite of things, that it seemedone with the general stolidity discernible in the whole visibleworld; which while pauselessly active in uncounted modes, stilleternally holds its peace, and ignores you, though you digfoundations for cathedrals.
Yet was this half-horrible stolidity inhim, involving, too, as it appeared, an all-ramifyingheartlessness;--yet was it oddly dashed at times, with an old,crutch-like, antediluvian, wheezing humorousness, not unstreaked nowand then with a certain grizzled wittiness; such as might have servedto pass the time during the midnight watch on the bearded forecastleof Noah's ark.
Was it that this old carpenter had been a life-longwanderer, whose much rolling, to and fro, not only had gathered nomoss; but what is more, had rubbed off whatever small outwardclingings might have originally pertained to him? He was a striptabstract; an unfractioned integral; uncompromised as a new-born babe;living without premeditated reference to this world or the next.
Youmight almost say, that this strange uncompromisedness in him involveda sort of unintelligence; for in his numerous trades, he did not seemto work so much by reason or by instinct, or simply because he hadbeen tutored to it, or by any intermixture of all these, even oruneven; but merely by a kind of deaf and dumb, spontaneous literalprocess.
He was a pure manipulator; his brain, if he had ever hadone, must have early oozed along into the muscles of his fingers.
Hewas like one of those unreasoning but still highly useful, MULTUM INPARVO, Sheffield contrivances, assuming the exterior--though a littleswelled--of a common pocket knife; but containing, not only blades ofvarious sizes, but also screw-drivers, cork-screws, tweezers, awls,pens, rulers, nail-filers, countersinkers.
So, if his superiorswanted to use the carpenter for a screw-driver, all they had to dowas to open that part of him, and the screw was fast: or if fortweezers, take him up by the legs, and there they were.
Yet, as previously hinted, this omnitooled, open-and-shut carpenter,was, after all, no mere machine of an automaton.
If he did not havea common soul in him, he had a subtle something that somehowanomalously did its duty.
What that was, whether essence ofquicksilver, or a few drops of hartshorn, there is no telling.
Butthere it was; and there it had abided for now some sixty years ormore.
And this it was, this same unaccountable, cunninglife-principle in him; this it was, that kept him a great part of thetime soliloquizing; but only like an unreasoning wheel, which alsohummingly soliloquizes; or rather, his body was a sentry-box and thissoliloquizer on guard there, and talking all the time to keep himselfawake.
Ahab and the Carpenter.
The Deck--First Night Watch.
(CARPENTER STANDING BEFORE HIS VICE-BENCH, AND BY THE LIGHT OF TWOLANTERNS BUSILY FILING THE IVORY JOIST FOR THE LEG, WHICH JOIST ISFIRMLY FIXED IN THE VICE.
SLABS OF IVORY, LEATHER STRAPS, PADS,SCREWS, AND VARIOUS TOOLS OF ALL SORTS LYING ABOUT THE BENCH.
FORWARD, THE RED FLAME OF THE FORGE IS SEEN, WHERE THE BLACKSMITH ISAT WORK.
)Drat the file, and drat the bone! That is hard which should be soft,and that is soft which should be hard.
So we go, who file old jawsand shinbones.
Let's try another.
Aye, now, this works better(SNEEZES).
Halloa, this bone dust is (SNEEZES)--why it's(SNEEZES)--yes it's (SNEEZES)--bless my soul, it won't let me speak!This is what an old fellow gets now for working in dead lumber.
Sawa live tree, and you don't get this dust; amputate a live bone, andyou don't get it (SNEEZES).
Come, come, you old Smut, there, bear ahand, and let's have that ferule and buckle-screw; I'll be readyfor them presently.
Lucky now (SNEEZES) there's no knee-joint tomake; that might puzzle a little; but a mere shinbone--why it'seasy as making hop-poles; only I should like to put a good finish on.
Time, time; if I but only had the time, I could turn him out as neata leg now as ever (SNEEZES) scraped to a lady in a parlor.
Thosebuckskin legs and calves of legs I've seen in shop windows wouldn'tcompare at all.
They soak water, they do; and of course getrheumatic, and have to be doctored (SNEEZES) with washes and lotions,just like live legs.
There; before I saw it off, now, I must call hisold Mogulship, and see whether the length will be all right; tooshort, if anything, I guess.
Ha! that's the heel; we are in luck;here he comes, or it's somebody else, that's certain.
AHAB (ADVANCING)(DURING THE ENSUING SCENE, THE CARPENTER CONTINUES SNEEZING AT TIMES)Well, manmaker!Just in time, sir.
If the captain pleases, I will now mark thelength.
Let me measure, sir.
Measured for a leg! good.
Well, it's not the first time.
About it!There; keep thy finger on it.
This is a cogent vice thou hast here,carpenter; let me feel its grip once.
So, so; it does pinch some.
Oh, sir, it will break bones--beware, beware!No fear; I like a good grip; I like to feel something in thisslippery world that can hold, man.
What's Prometheus aboutthere?--the blacksmith, I mean--what's he about?He must be forging the buckle-screw, sir, now.
Right.
It's a partnership; he supplies the muscle part.
He makes afierce red flame there!Aye, sir; he must have the white heat for this kind of fine work.
Um-m.
So he must.
I do deem it now a most meaning thing, that thatold Greek, Prometheus, who made men, they say, should have been ablacksmith, and animated them with fire; for what's made in fire mustproperly belong to fire; and so hell's probable.
How the soot flies!This must be the remainder the Greek made the Africans of.
Carpenter, when he's through with that buckle, tell him to forge apair of steel shoulder-blades; there's a pedlar aboard with acrushing pack.
Sir?Hold; while Prometheus is about it, I'll order a complete man after adesirable pattern.
Imprimis, fifty feet high in his socks; then,chest modelled after the Thames Tunnel; then, legs with roots to 'em,to stay in one place; then, arms three feet through the wrist; noheart at all, brass forehead, and about a quarter of an acre of finebrains; and let me see--shall I order eyes to see outwards? No, butput a sky-light on top of his head to illuminate inwards.
There,take the order, and away.
Now, what's he speaking about, and who's he speaking to, I shouldlike to know? Shall I keep standing here? (ASIDE).
'Tis but indifferent architecture to make a blind dome; here's one.
No, no, no; I must have a lantern.
Ho, ho! That's it, hey? Here are two, sir; one will serve my turn.
What art thou thrusting that thief-catcher into my face for, man?Thrusted light is worse than presented pistols.
I thought, sir, that you spoke to carpenter.
Carpenter? why that's--but no;--a very tidy, and, I may say, anextremely gentlemanlike sort of business thou art in here,carpenter;--or would'st thou rather work in clay?Sir?--Clay? clay, sir? That's mud; we leave clay to ditchers, sir.
The fellow's impious! What art thou sneezing about?Bone is rather dusty, sir.
Take the hint, then; and when thou art dead, never bury thyself underliving people's noses.
Sir?--oh! ah!--I guess so;--yes--dear!Look ye, carpenter, I dare say thou callest thyself a right goodworkmanlike workman, eh? Well, then, will it speak thoroughly wellfor thy work, if, when I come to mount this leg thou makest, I shallnevertheless feel another leg in the same identical place with it;that is, carpenter, my old lost leg; the flesh and blood one, I mean.
Canst thou not drive that old Adam away?Truly, sir, I begin to understand somewhat now.
Yes, I have heardsomething curious on that score, sir; how that a dismasted man neverentirely loses the feeling of his old spar, but it will be stillpricking him at times.
May I humbly ask if it be really so, sir?It is, man.
Look, put thy live leg here in the place where mine oncewas; so, now, here is only one distinct leg to the eye, yet two tothe soul.
Where thou feelest tingling life; there, exactly there,there to a hair, do I.
Is't a riddle?I should humbly call it a poser, sir.
Hist, then.
How dost thou know that some entire, living, thinkingthing may not be invisibly and uninterpenetratingly standingprecisely where thou now standest; aye, and standing there in thyspite? In thy most solitary hours, then, dost thou not feareavesdroppers? Hold, don't speak! And if I still feel the smart ofmy crushed leg, though it be now so long dissolved; then, why maystnot thou, carpenter, feel the fiery pains of hell for ever, andwithout a body? Hah!Good Lord! Truly, sir, if it comes to that, I must calculate overagain; I think I didn't carry a small figure, sir.
Look ye, pudding-heads should never grant premises.
--How long beforethe leg is done?Perhaps an hour, sir.
Bungle away at it then, and bring it to me (TURNS TO GO).
Oh, Life!Here I am, proud as Greek god, and yet standing debtor to thisblockhead for a bone to stand on! Cursed be that mortalinter-indebtedness which will not do away with ledgers.
I would befree as air; and I'm down in the whole world's books.
I am so rich,I could have given bid for bid with the wealthiest Praetorians at theauction of the Roman empire (which was the world's); and yet I owefor the flesh in the tongue I brag with.
By heavens! I'll get acrucible, and into it, and dissolve myself down to one small,compendious vertebra.
So.
CARPENTER (RESUMING HIS WORK).
Well, well, well! Stubb knows him best of all, and Stubb always sayshe's queer; says nothing but that one sufficient little word queer;he's queer, says Stubb; he's queer--queer, queer; and keeps dinningit into Mr.
Starbuck all the time--queer--sir--queer, queer, veryqueer.
And here's his leg! Yes, now that I think of it, here's hisbedfellow! has a stick of whale's jaw-bone for a wife! And this ishis leg; he'll stand on this.
What was that now about one legstanding in three places, and all three places standing in onehell--how was that? Oh! I don't wonder he looked so scornful at me!I'm a sort of strange-thoughted sometimes, they say; but that's onlyhaphazard-like.
Then, a short, little old body like me, should neverundertake to wade out into deep waters with tall, heron-builtcaptains; the water chucks you under the chin pretty quick, andthere's a great cry for life-boats.
And here's the heron's leg! longand slim, sure enough! Now, for most folks one pair of legs lasts alifetime, and that must be because they use them mercifully, as atender-hearted old lady uses her roly-poly old coach-horses.
ButAhab; oh he's a hard driver.
Look, driven one leg to death, andspavined the other for life, and now wears out bone legs by the cord.
Halloa, there, you Smut! bear a hand there with those screws, andlet's finish it before the resurrection fellow comes a-calling withhis horn for all legs, true or false, as brewery-men go roundcollecting old beer barrels, to fill 'em up again.
What a leg thisis! It looks like a real live leg, filed down to nothing but thecore; he'll be standing on this to-morrow; he'll be taking altitudeson it.
Halloa! I almost forgot the little oval slate, smoothedivory, where he figures up the latitude.
So, so; chisel, file, andsand-paper, now!Ahab and Starbuck in the Cabin.
According to usage they were pumping the ship next morning; and lo!no inconsiderable oil came up with the water; the casks below musthave sprung a bad leak.
Much concern was shown; and Starbuck wentdown into the cabin to report this unfavourable affair.
**In Sperm-whalemen with any considerable quantity of oil on board, itis a regular semiweekly duty to conduct a hose into the hold, anddrench the casks with sea-water; which afterwards, at varyingintervals, is removed by the ship's pumps.
Hereby the casks aresought to be kept damply tight; while by the changed character of thewithdrawn water, the mariners readily detect any serious leakage inthe precious cargo.
Now, from the South and West the Pequod was drawing nigh to Formosaand the Bashee Isles, between which lies one of the tropical outletsfrom the China waters into the Pacific.
And so Starbuck found Ahabwith a general chart of the oriental archipelagoes spread before him;and another separate one representing the long eastern coasts of theJapanese islands--Niphon, Matsmai, and Sikoke.
With his snow-whitenew ivory leg braced against the screwed leg of his table, and with along pruning-hook of a jack-knife in his hand, the wondrous old man,with his back to the gangway door, was wrinkling his brow, andtracing his old courses again.
"Who's there?" hearing the footstep at the door, but not turninground to it.
"On deck! Begone!""Captain Ahab mistakes; it is I.
The oil in the hold is leaking,sir.
We must up Burtons and break out.
""Up Burtons and break out? Now that we are nearing Japan; heave-tohere for a week to tinker a parcel of old hoops?""Either do that, sir, or waste in one day more oil than we may makegood in a year.
What we come twenty thousand miles to get is worthsaving, sir.
""So it is, so it is; if we get it.
""I was speaking of the oil in the hold, sir.
""And I was not speaking or thinking of that at all.
Begone! Let itleak! I'm all aleak myself.
Aye! leaks in leaks! not only full ofleaky casks, but those leaky casks are in a leaky ship; and that's afar worse plight than the Pequod's, man.
Yet I don't stop to plug myleak; for who can find it in the deep-loaded hull; or how hope toplug it, even if found, in this life's howling gale? Starbuck!I'll not have the Burtons hoisted.
""What will the owners say, sir?""Let the owners stand on Nantucket beach and outyell the Typhoons.
What cares Ahab? Owners, owners? Thou art always prating to me,Starbuck, about those miserly owners, as if the owners were myconscience.
But look ye, the only real owner of anything is itscommander; and hark ye, my conscience is in this ship's keel.
--Ondeck!""Captain Ahab," said the reddening mate, moving further into thecabin, with a daring so strangely respectful and cautious that italmost seemed not only every way seeking to avoid the slightestoutward manifestation of itself, but within also seemed more thanhalf distrustful of itself; "A better man than I might well pass overin thee what he would quickly enough resent in a younger man; aye,and in a happier, Captain Ahab.
""Devils! Dost thou then so much as dare to critically think ofme?--On deck!""Nay, sir, not yet; I do entreat.
And I do dare, sir--to beforbearing! Shall we not understand each other better than hitherto,Captain Ahab?"Ahab seized a loaded musket from the rack (forming part of mostSouth-Sea-men's cabin furniture), and pointing it towards Starbuck,exclaimed: "There is one God that is Lord over the earth, and oneCaptain that is lord over the Pequod.
--On deck!"For an instant in the flashing eyes of the mate, and his fierycheeks, you would have almost thought that he had really received theblaze of the levelled tube.
But, mastering his emotion, he halfcalmly rose, and as he quitted the cabin, paused for an instant andsaid: "Thou hast outraged, not insulted me, sir; but for that I askthee not to beware of Starbuck; thou wouldst but laugh; but let Ahabbeware of Ahab; beware of thyself, old man.
""He waxes brave, but nevertheless obeys; most careful bravery that!"murmured Ahab, as Starbuck disappeared.
"What's that he said--Ahabbeware of Ahab--there's something there!" Then unconsciously usingthe musket for a staff, with an iron brow he paced to and fro in thelittle cabin; but presently the thick plaits of his forehead relaxed,and returning the gun to the rack, he went to the deck.
"Thou art but too good a fellow, Starbuck," he said lowly to themate; then raising his voice to the crew: "Furl the t'gallant-sails,and close-reef the top-sails, fore and aft; back the main-yard; upBurton, and break out in the main-hold.
"It were perhaps vain to surmise exactly why it was, that asrespecting Starbuck, Ahab thus acted.
It may have been a flash ofhonesty in him; or mere prudential policy which, under thecircumstance, imperiously forbade the slightest symptom of opendisaffection, however transient, in the important chief officer ofhis ship.
However it was, his orders were executed; and the Burtonswere hoisted.
Queequeg in His Coffin.
Upon searching, it was found that the casks last struck into the holdwere perfectly sound, and that the leak must be further off.
So, itbeing calm weather, they broke out deeper and deeper, disturbing theslumbers of the huge ground-tier butts; and from that black midnightsending those gigantic moles into the daylight above.
So deep didthey go; and so ancient, and corroded, and weedy the aspect of thelowermost puncheons, that you almost looked next for some mouldycorner-stone cask containing coins of Captain Noah, with copies ofthe posted placards, vainly warning the infatuated old world from theflood.
Tierce after tierce, too, of water, and bread, and beef, andshooks of staves, and iron bundles of hoops, were hoisted out, tillat last the piled decks were hard to get about; and the hollow hullechoed under foot, as if you were treading over empty catacombs, andreeled and rolled in the sea like an air-freighted demijohn.
Top-heavy was the ship as a dinnerless student with all Aristotle inhis head.
Well was it that the Typhoons did not visit them then.
Now, at this time it was that my poor pagan companion, and fastbosom-friend, Queequeg, was seized with a fever, which brought himnigh to his endless end.
Be it said, that in this vocation of whaling, sinecures are unknown;dignity and danger go hand in hand; till you get to be Captain, thehigher you rise the harder you toil.
So with poor Queequeg, who, asharpooneer, must not only face all the rage of the living whale,but--as we have elsewhere seen--mount his dead back in a rolling sea;and finally descend into the gloom of the hold, and bitterly sweatingall day in that subterraneous confinement, resolutely manhandle theclumsiest casks and see to their stowage.
To be short, amongwhalemen, the harpooneers are the holders, so called.
Poor Queequeg! when the ship was about half disembowelled, you shouldhave stooped over the hatchway, and peered down upon him there;where, stripped to his woollen drawers, the tattooed savage wascrawling about amid that dampness and slime, like a green spottedlizard at the bottom of a well.
And a well, or an ice-house, itsomehow proved to him, poor pagan; where, strange to say, for all theheat of his sweatings, he caught a terrible chill which lapsed into afever; and at last, after some days' suffering, laid him in hishammock, close to the very sill of the door of death.
How he wastedand wasted away in those few long-lingering days, till there seemedbut little left of him but his frame and tattooing.
But as all elsein him thinned, and his cheek-bones grew sharper, his eyes,nevertheless, seemed growing fuller and fuller; they became of astrange softness of lustre; and mildly but deeply looked out at youthere from his sickness, a wondrous testimony to that immortal healthin him which could not die, or be weakened.
And like circles on thewater, which, as they grow fainter, expand; so his eyes seemedrounding and rounding, like the rings of Eternity.
An awe thatcannot be named would steal over you as you sat by the side of thiswaning savage, and saw as strange things in his face, as any beheldwho were bystanders when Zoroaster died.
For whatever is trulywondrous and fearful in man, never yet was put into words or books.
And the drawing near of Death, which alike levels all, alikeimpresses all with a last revelation, which only an author from thedead could adequately tell.
So that--let us say it again--no dyingChaldee or Greek had higher and holier thoughts than those, whosemysterious shades you saw creeping over the face of poor Queequeg, ashe quietly lay in his swaying hammock, and the rolling sea seemedgently rocking him to his final rest, and the ocean's invisibleflood-tide lifted him higher and higher towards his destined heaven.
Not a man of the crew but gave him up; and, as for Queequeg himself,what he thought of his case was forcibly shown by a curious favour heasked.
He called one to him in the grey morning watch, when the daywas just breaking, and taking his hand, said that while in Nantuckethe had chanced to see certain little canoes of dark wood, like therich war-wood of his native isle; and upon inquiry, he had learnedthat all whalemen who died in Nantucket, were laid in those same darkcanoes, and that the fancy of being so laid had much pleased him; forit was not unlike the custom of his own race, who, after embalming adead warrior, stretched him out in his canoe, and so left him to befloated away to the starry archipelagoes; for not only do theybelieve that the stars are isles, but that far beyond all visiblehorizons, their own mild, uncontinented seas, interflow with the blueheavens; and so form the white breakers of the milky way.
He added,that he shuddered at the thought of being buried in his hammock,according to the usual sea-custom, tossed like something vile to thedeath-devouring sharks.
No: he desired a canoe like those ofNantucket, all the more congenial to him, being a whaleman, that likea whale-boat these coffin-canoes were without a keel; though thatinvolved but uncertain steering, and much lee-way adown the dim ages.
Now, when this strange circumstance was made known aft, the carpenterwas at once commanded to do Queequeg's bidding, whatever it mightinclude.
There was some heathenish, coffin-coloured old lumberaboard, which, upon a long previous voyage, had been cut from theaboriginal groves of the Lackaday islands, and from these dark planksthe coffin was recommended to be made.
No sooner was the carpenterapprised of the order, than taking his rule, he forthwith with allthe indifferent promptitude of his character, proceeded into theforecastle and took Queequeg's measure with great accuracy, regularlychalking Queequeg's person as he shifted the rule.
"Ah! poor fellow! he'll have to die now," ejaculated the Long Islandsailor.
Going to his vice-bench, the carpenter for convenience sake andgeneral reference, now transferringly measured on it the exact lengththe coffin was to be, and then made the transfer permanent by cuttingtwo notches at its extremities.
This done, he marshalled the planksand his tools, and to work.
When the last nail was driven, and the lid duly planed and fitted, helightly shouldered the coffin and went forward with it, inquiringwhether they were ready for it yet in that direction.
Overhearing the indignant but half-humorous cries with which thepeople on deck began to drive the coffin away, Queequeg, to everyone's consternation, commanded that the thing should be instantlybrought to him, nor was there any denying him; seeing that, of allmortals, some dying men are the most tyrannical; and certainly, sincethey will shortly trouble us so little for evermore, the poor fellowsought to be indulged.
Leaning over in his hammock, Queequeg long regarded the coffin withan attentive eye.
He then called for his harpoon, had the woodenstock drawn from it, and then had the iron part placed in the coffinalong with one of the paddles of his boat.
All by his own request,also, biscuits were then ranged round the sides within: a flask offresh water was placed at the head, and a small bag of woody earthscraped up in the hold at the foot; and a piece of sail-cloth beingrolled up for a pillow, Queequeg now entreated to be lifted into hisfinal bed, that he might make trial of its comforts, if any it had.
He lay without moving a few minutes, then told one to go to his bagand bring out his little god, Yojo.
Then crossing his arms on hisbreast with Yojo between, he called for the coffin lid (hatch hecalled it) to be placed over him.
The head part turned over with aleather hinge, and there lay Queequeg in his coffin with little buthis composed countenance in view.
"Rarmai" (it will do; it is easy),he murmured at last, and signed to be replaced in his hammock.
But ere this was done, Pip, who had been slily hovering near by allthis while, drew nigh to him where he lay, and with soft sobbings,took him by the hand; in the other, holding his tambourine.
"Poor rover! will ye never have done with all this weary roving?where go ye now? But if the currents carry ye to those sweetAntilles where the beaches are only beat with water-lilies, will yedo one little errand for me? Seek out one Pip, who's now beenmissing long: I think he's in those far Antilles.
If ye find him,then comfort him; for he must be very sad; for look! he's left histambourine behind;--I found it.
Rig-a-dig, dig, dig! Now, Queequeg,die; and I'll beat ye your dying march.
""I have heard," murmured Starbuck, gazing down the scuttle, "that inviolent fevers, men, all ignorance, have talked in ancient tongues;and that when the mystery is probed, it turns out always that intheir wholly forgotten childhood those ancient tongues had beenreally spoken in their hearing by some lofty scholars.
So, to myfond faith, poor Pip, in this strange sweetness of his lunacy, bringsheavenly vouchers of all our heavenly homes.
Where learned he that,but there?--Hark! he speaks again: but more wildly now.
""Form two and two! Let's make a General of him! Ho, where's hisharpoon? Lay it across here.
--Rig-a-dig, dig, dig! huzza! Oh for agame cock now to sit upon his head and crow! Queequeg diesgame!--mind ye that; Queequeg dies game!--take ye good heed of that;Queequeg dies game! I say; game, game, game! but base little Pip, hedied a coward; died all a'shiver;--out upon Pip! Hark ye; if ye findPip, tell all the Antilles he's a runaway; a coward, a coward, acoward! Tell them he jumped from a whale-boat! I'd never beat mytambourine over base Pip, and hail him General, if he were once moredying here.
No, no! shame upon all cowards--shame upon them! Let 'emgo drown like Pip, that jumped from a whale-boat.
Shame! shame!"During all this, Queequeg lay with closed eyes, as if in a dream.
Pip was led away, and the sick man was replaced in his hammock.
But now that he had apparently made every preparation for death; nowthat his coffin was proved a good fit, Queequeg suddenly rallied;soon there seemed no need of the carpenter's box: and thereupon,when some expressed their delighted surprise, he, in substance, said,that the cause of his sudden convalescence was this;--at a criticalmoment, he had just recalled a little duty ashore, which he wasleaving undone; and therefore had changed his mind about dying: hecould not die yet, he averred.
They asked him, then, whether to liveor die was a matter of his own sovereign will and pleasure.
Heanswered, certainly.
In a word, it was Queequeg's conceit, that if aman made up his mind to live, mere sickness could not kill him:nothing but a whale, or a gale, or some violent, ungovernable,unintelligent destroyer of that sort.
Now, there is this noteworthy difference between savage andcivilized; that while a sick, civilized man may be six monthsconvalescing, generally speaking, a sick savage is almost half-wellagain in a day.
So, in good time my Queequeg gained strength; and atlength after sitting on the windlass for a few indolent days (buteating with a vigorous appetite) he suddenly leaped to his feet,threw out his arms and legs, gave himself a good stretching, yawneda little bit, and then springing into the head of his hoisted boat,and poising a harpoon, pronounced himself fit for a fight.
With a wild whimsiness, he now used his coffin for a sea-chest; andemptying into it his canvas bag of clothes, set them in order there.
Many spare hours he spent, in carving the lid with all manner ofgrotesque figures and drawings; and it seemed that hereby he wasstriving, in his rude way, to copy parts of the twisted tattooing onhis body.
And this tattooing had been the work of a departedprophet and seer of his island, who, by those hieroglyphic marks, hadwritten out on his body a complete theory of the heavens and theearth, and a mystical treatise on the art of attaining truth; so thatQueequeg in his own proper person was a riddle to unfold; a wondrouswork in one volume; but whose mysteries not even himself could read,though his own live heart beat against them; and these mysteries weretherefore destined in the end to moulder away with the livingparchment whereon they were inscribed, and so be unsolved to thelast.
And this thought it must have been which suggested to Ahabthat wild exclamation of his, when one morning turning away fromsurveying poor Queequeg--"Oh, devilish tantalization of the gods!"The Pacific.
When gliding by the Bashee isles we emerged at last upon the greatSouth Sea; were it not for other things, I could have greeted my dearPacific with uncounted thanks, for now the long supplication of myyouth was answered; that serene ocean rolled eastwards from me athousand leagues of blue.
There is, one knows not what sweet mystery about this sea, whosegently awful stirrings seem to speak of some hidden soul beneath;like those fabled undulations of the Ephesian sod over the buriedEvangelist St.
John.
And meet it is, that over these sea-pastures,wide-rolling watery prairies and Potters' Fields of all fourcontinents, the waves should rise and fall, and ebb and flowunceasingly; for here, millions of mixed shades and shadows, drowneddreams, somnambulisms, reveries; all that we call lives and souls,lie dreaming, dreaming, still; tossing like slumberers in their beds;the ever-rolling waves but made so by their restlessness.
To any meditative Magian rover, this serene Pacific, once beheld,must ever after be the sea of his adoption.
It rolls the midmostwaters of the world, the Indian ocean and Atlantic being but itsarms.
The same waves wash the moles of the new-built Californiantowns, but yesterday planted by the recentest race of men, and lavethe faded but still gorgeous skirts of Asiatic lands, older thanAbraham; while all between float milky-ways of coral isles, andlow-lying, endless, unknown Archipelagoes, and impenetrable Japans.
Thus this mysterious, divine Pacific zones the world's whole bulkabout; makes all coasts one bay to it; seems the tide-beating heartof earth.
Lifted by those eternal swells, you needs must own theseductive god, bowing your head to Pan.
But few thoughts of Pan stirred Ahab's brain, as standing like aniron statue at his accustomed place beside the mizen rigging, withone nostril he unthinkingly snuffed the sugary musk from the Basheeisles (in whose sweet woods mild lovers must be walking), and withthe other consciously inhaled the salt breath of the new found sea;that sea in which the hated White Whale must even then be swimming.
Launched at length upon these almost final waters, and glidingtowards the Japanese cruising-ground, the old man's purposeintensified itself.
His firm lips met like the lips of a vice; theDelta of his forehead's veins swelled like overladen brooks; in hisvery sleep, his ringing cry ran through the vaulted hull, "Stern all!the White Whale spouts thick blood!"The Blacksmith.
Availing himself of the mild, summer-cool weather that now reignedin these latitudes, and in preparation for the peculiarly activepursuits shortly to be anticipated, Perth, the begrimed, blisteredold blacksmith, had not removed his portable forge to the hold again,after concluding his contributory work for Ahab's leg, but stillretained it on deck, fast lashed to ringbolts by the foremast; beingnow almost incessantly invoked by the headsmen, and harpooneers, andbowsmen to do some little job for them; altering, or repairing, ornew shaping their various weapons and boat furniture.
Often he wouldbe surrounded by an eager circle, all waiting to be served; holdingboat-spades, pike-heads, harpoons, and lances, and jealously watchinghis every sooty movement, as he toiled.
Nevertheless, this old man'swas a patient hammer wielded by a patient arm.
No murmur, noimpatience, no petulance did come from him.
Silent, slow, andsolemn; bowing over still further his chronically broken back, hetoiled away, as if toil were life itself, and the heavy beating ofhis hammer the heavy beating of his heart.
And so it was.
--Mostmiserable!A peculiar walk in this old man, a certain slight but painfulappearing yawing in his gait, had at an early period of the voyageexcited the curiosity of the mariners.
And to the importunity oftheir persisted questionings he had finally given in; and so it cameto pass that every one now knew the shameful story of his wretchedfate.
Belated, and not innocently, one bitter winter's midnight, on theroad running between two country towns, the blacksmith half-stupidlyfelt the deadly numbness stealing over him, and sought refuge in aleaning, dilapidated barn.
The issue was, the loss of theextremities of both feet.
Out of this revelation, part by part, atlast came out the four acts of the gladness, and the one long, and asyet uncatastrophied fifth act of the grief of his life's drama.
He was an old man, who, at the age of nearly sixty, had postponedlyencountered that thing in sorrow's technicals called ruin.
He hadbeen an artisan of famed excellence, and with plenty to do; owned ahouse and garden; embraced a youthful, daughter-like, loving wife,and three blithe, ruddy children; every Sunday went to acheerful-looking church, planted in a grove.
But one night, undercover of darkness, and further concealed in a most cunningdisguisement, a desperate burglar slid into his happy home, androbbed them all of everything.
And darker yet to tell, theblacksmith himself did ignorantly conduct this burglar into hisfamily's heart.
It was the Bottle Conjuror! Upon the opening ofthat fatal cork, forth flew the fiend, and shrivelled up his home.
Now, for prudent, most wise, and economic reasons, the blacksmith'sshop was in the basement of his dwelling, but with a separateentrance to it; so that always had the young and loving healthy wifelistened with no unhappy nervousness, but with vigorous pleasure, tothe stout ringing of her young-armed old husband's hammer; whosereverberations, muffled by passing through the floors and walls, cameup to her, not unsweetly, in her nursery; and so, to stout Labor'siron lullaby, the blacksmith's infants were rocked to slumber.
Oh, woe on woe! Oh, Death, why canst thou not sometimes be timely?Hadst thou taken this old blacksmith to thyself ere his full ruincame upon him, then had the young widow had a delicious grief, andher orphans a truly venerable, legendary sire to dream of in theirafter years; and all of them a care-killing competency.
But Deathplucked down some virtuous elder brother, on whose whistling dailytoil solely hung the responsibilities of some other family, and leftthe worse than useless old man standing, till the hideous rot of lifeshould make him easier to harvest.
Why tell the whole? The blows of the basement hammer every day grewmore and more between; and each blow every day grew fainter than thelast; the wife sat frozen at the window, with tearless eyes,glitteringly gazing into the weeping faces of her children; thebellows fell; the forge choked up with cinders; the house was sold;the mother dived down into the long church-yard grass; her childrentwice followed her thither; and the houseless, familyless old manstaggered off a vagabond in crape; his every woe unreverenced; hisgrey head a scorn to flaxen curls!Death seems the only desirable sequel for a career like this; butDeath is only a launching into the region of the strange Untried; itis but the first salutation to the possibilities of the immenseRemote, the Wild, the Watery, the Unshored; therefore, to thedeath-longing eyes of such men, who still have left in them someinterior compunctions against suicide, does the all-contributed andall-receptive ocean alluringly spread forth his whole plain ofunimaginable, taking terrors, and wonderful, new-life adventures; andfrom the hearts of infinite Pacifics, the thousand mermaids sing tothem--"Come hither, broken-hearted; here is another life without theguilt of intermediate death; here are wonders supernatural, withoutdying for them.
Come hither! bury thyself in a life which, to yournow equally abhorred and abhorring, landed world, is more obliviousthan death.
Come hither! put up THY gravestone, too, within thechurchyard, and come hither, till we marry thee!"Hearkening to these voices, East and West, by early sunrise, and byfall of eve, the blacksmith's soul responded, Aye, I come! And soPerth went a-whaling.
The Forge.
With matted beard, and swathed in a bristling shark-skin apron, aboutmid-day, Perth was standing between his forge and anvil, the latterplaced upon an iron-wood log, with one hand holding a pike-head inthe coals, and with the other at his forge's lungs, when Captain Ahabcame along, carrying in his hand a small rusty-looking leathern bag.
While yet a little distance from the forge, moody Ahab paused; tillat last, Perth, withdrawing his iron from the fire, began hammeringit upon the anvil--the red mass sending off the sparks in thickhovering flights, some of which flew close to Ahab.
"Are these thy Mother Carey's chickens, Perth? they are always flyingin thy wake; birds of good omen, too, but not to all;--look here,they burn; but thou--thou liv'st among them without a scorch.
""Because I am scorched all over, Captain Ahab," answered Perth,resting for a moment on his hammer; "I am past scorching; not easilycan'st thou scorch a scar.
""Well, well; no more.
Thy shrunk voice sounds too calmly, sanelywoeful to me.
In no Paradise myself, I am impatient of all misery inothers that is not mad.
Thou should'st go mad, blacksmith; say, whydost thou not go mad? How can'st thou endure without being mad? Dothe heavens yet hate thee, that thou can'st not go mad?--What wertthou making there?""Welding an old pike-head, sir; there were seams and dents in it.
""And can'st thou make it all smooth again, blacksmith, after suchhard usage as it had?""I think so, sir.
""And I suppose thou can'st smoothe almost any seams and dents; nevermind how hard the metal, blacksmith?""Aye, sir, I think I can; all seams and dents but one.
""Look ye here, then," cried Ahab, passionately advancing, and leaningwith both hands on Perth's shoulders; "look ye here--HERE--can yesmoothe out a seam like this, blacksmith," sweeping one hand acrosshis ribbed brow; "if thou could'st, blacksmith, glad enough would Ilay my head upon thy anvil, and feel thy heaviest hammer between myeyes.
Answer! Can'st thou smoothe this seam?""Oh! that is the one, sir! Said I not all seams and dents but one?""Aye, blacksmith, it is the one; aye, man, it is unsmoothable; forthough thou only see'st it here in my flesh, it has worked down intothe bone of my skull--THAT is all wrinkles! But, away with child'splay; no more gaffs and pikes to-day.
Look ye here!" jingling theleathern bag, as if it were full of gold coins.
"I, too, want aharpoon made; one that a thousand yoke of fiends could not part,Perth; something that will stick in a whale like his own fin-bone.
There's the stuff," flinging the pouch upon the anvil.
"Look ye,blacksmith, these are the gathered nail-stubbs of the steel shoes ofracing horses.
""Horse-shoe stubbs, sir? Why, Captain Ahab, thou hast here, then,the best and stubbornest stuff we blacksmiths ever work.
""I know it, old man; these stubbs will weld together like glue fromthe melted bones of murderers.
Quick! forge me the harpoon.
Andforge me first, twelve rods for its shank; then wind, and twist, andhammer these twelve together like the yarns and strands of atow-line.
Quick! I'll blow the fire.
"When at last the twelve rods were made, Ahab tried them, one by one,by spiralling them, with his own hand, round a long, heavy iron bolt.
"A flaw!" rejecting the last one.
"Work that over again, Perth.
"This done, Perth was about to begin welding the twelve into one, whenAhab stayed his hand, and said he would weld his own iron.
As, then,with regular, gasping hems, he hammered on the anvil, Perth passingto him the glowing rods, one after the other, and the hard pressedforge shooting up its intense straight flame, the Parsee passedsilently, and bowing over his head towards the fire, seemed invokingsome curse or some blessing on the toil.
But, as Ahab looked up, heslid aside.
"What's that bunch of lucifers dodging about there for?" mutteredStubb, looking on from the forecastle.
"That Parsee smells fire likea fusee; and smells of it himself, like a hot musket's powder-pan.
"At last the shank, in one complete rod, received its final heat; andas Perth, to temper it, plunged it all hissing into the cask of waternear by, the scalding steam shot up into Ahab's bent face.
"Would'st thou brand me, Perth?" wincing for a moment with the pain;"have I been but forging my own branding-iron, then?""Pray God, not that; yet I fear something, Captain Ahab.
Is not thisharpoon for the White Whale?""For the white fiend! But now for the barbs; thou must make themthyself, man.
Here are my razors--the best of steel; here, and makethe barbs sharp as the needle-sleet of the Icy Sea.
"For a moment, the old blacksmith eyed the razors as though he wouldfain not use them.
"Take them, man, I have no need for them; for I now neither shave,sup, nor pray till--but here--to work!"Fashioned at last into an arrowy shape, and welded by Perth to theshank, the steel soon pointed the end of the iron; and as theblacksmith was about giving the barbs their final heat, prior totempering them, he cried to Ahab to place the water-cask near.
"No, no--no water for that; I want it of the true death-temper.
Ahoy, there! Tashtego, Queequeg, Daggoo! What say ye, pagans! Willye give me as much blood as will cover this barb?" holding it highup.
A cluster of dark nods replied, Yes.
Three punctures were madein the heathen flesh, and the White Whale's barbs were then tempered.
"Ego non baptizo te in nomine patris, sed in nomine diaboli!"deliriously howled Ahab, as the malignant iron scorchingly devouredthe baptismal blood.
Now, mustering the spare poles from below, and selecting one ofhickory, with the bark still investing it, Ahab fitted the end to thesocket of the iron.
A coil of new tow-line was then unwound, andsome fathoms of it taken to the windlass, and stretched to a greattension.
Pressing his foot upon it, till the rope hummed like aharp-string, then eagerly bending over it, and seeing no strandings,Ahab exclaimed, "Good! and now for the seizings.
"At one extremity the rope was unstranded, and the separate spreadyarns were all braided and woven round the socket of the harpoon; thepole was then driven hard up into the socket; from the lower end therope was traced half-way along the pole's length, and firmly securedso, with intertwistings of twine.
This done, pole, iron, andrope--like the Three Fates--remained inseparable, and Ahab moodilystalked away with the weapon; the sound of his ivory leg, and thesound of the hickory pole, both hollowly ringing along every plank.
But ere he entered his cabin, light, unnatural, half-bantering, yetmost piteous sound was heard.
Oh, Pip! thy wretched laugh, thyidle but unresting eye; all thy strange mummeries not unmeaninglyblended with the black tragedy of the melancholy ship, and mocked it!The Gilder.
Penetrating further and further into the heart of the Japanesecruising ground, the Pequod was soon all astir in the fishery.
Often, in mild, pleasant weather, for twelve, fifteen, eighteen, andtwenty hours on the stretch, they were engaged in the boats, steadilypulling, or sailing, or paddling after the whales, or for aninterlude of sixty or seventy minutes calmly awaiting their uprising;though with but small success for their pains.
At such times, under an abated sun; afloat all day upon smooth, slowheaving swells; seated in his boat, light as a birch canoe; and sosociably mixing with the soft waves themselves, that likehearth-stone cats they purr against the gunwale; these are the timesof dreamy quietude, when beholding the tranquil beauty and brilliancyof the ocean's skin, one forgets the tiger heart that pants beneathit; and would not willingly remember, that this velvet paw butconceals a remorseless fang.
These are the times, when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels acertain filial, confident, land-like feeling towards the sea; that heregards it as so much flowery earth; and the distant ship revealingonly the tops of her masts, seems struggling forward, not throughhigh rolling waves, but through the tall grass of a rolling prairie:as when the western emigrants' horses only show their erected ears,while their hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing verdure.
The long-drawn virgin vales; the mild blue hill-sides; as over thesethere steals the hush, the hum; you almost swear that play-weariedchildren lie sleeping in these solitudes, in some glad May-time, whenthe flowers of the woods are plucked.
And all this mixes with yourmost mystic mood; so that fact and fancy, half-way meeting,interpenetrate, and form one seamless whole.
Nor did such soothing scenes, however temporary, fail of at least astemporary an effect on Ahab.
But if these secret golden keys didseem to open in him his own secret golden treasuries, yet did hisbreath upon them prove but tarnishing.
Oh, grassy glades! oh, ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul; inye,--though long parched by the dead drought of the earthylife,--in ye, men yet may roll, like young horses in new morningclover; and for some few fleeting moments, feel the cool dew of thelife immortal on them.
Would to God these blessed calms would last.
But the mingled, mingling threads of life are woven by warp and woof:calms crossed by storms, a storm for every calm.
There is no steadyunretracing progress in this life; we do not advance through fixedgradations, and at the last one pause:--through infancy's unconsciousspell, boyhood's thoughtless faith, adolescence' doubt (the commondoom), then scepticism, then disbelief, resting at last in manhood'spondering repose of If.
But once gone through, we trace the roundagain; and are infants, boys, and men, and Ifs eternally.
Where liesthe final harbor, whence we unmoor no more? In what rapt ether sailsthe world, of which the weariest will never weary? Where is thefoundling's father hidden? Our souls are like those orphans whoseunwedded mothers die in bearing them: the secret of our paternitylies in their grave, and we must there to learn it.
And that same day, too, gazing far down from his boat's side intothat same golden sea, Starbuck lowly murmured:--"Loveliness unfathomable, as ever lover saw in his young bride'seye!--Tell me not of thy teeth-tiered sharks, and thy kidnappingcannibal ways.
Let faith oust fact; let fancy oust memory; I lookdeep down and do believe.
"And Stubb, fish-like, with sparkling scales, leaped up in that samegolden light:--"I am Stubb, and Stubb has his history; but here Stubb takes oathsthat he has always been jolly!"The Pequod Meets The Bachelor.
And jolly enough were the sights and the sounds that came bearingdown before the wind, some few weeks after Ahab's harpoon had beenwelded.
It was a Nantucket ship, the Bachelor, which had just wedged in herlast cask of oil, and bolted down her bursting hatches; and now, inglad holiday apparel, was joyously, though somewhat vain-gloriously,sailing round among the widely-separated ships on the ground,previous to pointing her prow for home.
The three men at her mast-head wore long streamers of narrow redbunting at their hats; from the stern, a whale-boat was suspended,bottom down; and hanging captive from the bowsprit was seen the longlower jaw of the last whale they had slain.
Signals, ensigns, andjacks of all colours were flying from her rigging, on every side.
Sideways lashed in each of her three basketed tops were two barrelsof sperm; above which, in her top-mast cross-trees, you saw slenderbreakers of the same precious fluid; and nailed to her main truck wasa brazen lamp.
As was afterwards learned, the Bachelor had met with the mostsurprising success; all the more wonderful, for that while cruisingin the same seas numerous other vessels had gone entire monthswithout securing a single fish.
Not only had barrels of beef andbread been given away to make room for the far more valuable sperm,but additional supplemental casks had been bartered for, from theships she had met; and these were stowed along the deck, and in thecaptain's and officers' state-rooms.
Even the cabin table itselfhad been knocked into kindling-wood; and the cabin mess dined off thebroad head of an oil-butt, lashed down to the floor for acentrepiece.
In the forecastle, the sailors had actually caulkedand pitched their chests, and filled them; it was humorously added,that the cook had clapped a head on his largest boiler, and filledit; that the steward had plugged his spare coffee-pot and filled it;that the harpooneers had headed the sockets of their irons and filledthem; that indeed everything was filled with sperm, except thecaptain's pantaloons pockets, and those he reserved to thrust hishands into, in self-complacent testimony of his entire satisfaction.
As this glad ship of good luck bore down upon the moody Pequod, thebarbarian sound of enormous drums came from her forecastle; anddrawing still nearer, a crowd of her men were seen standing round herhuge try-pots, which, covered with the parchment-like POKE or stomachskin of the black fish, gave forth a loud roar to every stroke of theclenched hands of the crew.
On the quarter-deck, the mates andharpooneers were dancing with the olive-hued girls who had elopedwith them from the Polynesian Isles; while suspended in anornamented boat, firmly secured aloft between the foremast andmainmast, three Long Island negroes, with glittering fiddle-bows ofwhale ivory, were presiding over the hilarious jig.
Meanwhile,others of the ship's company were tumultuously busy at the masonry ofthe try-works, from which the huge pots had been removed.
You wouldhave almost thought they were pulling down the cursed Bastille, suchwild cries they raised, as the now useless brick and mortar werebeing hurled into the sea.
Lord and master over all this scene, the captain stood erect on theship's elevated quarter-deck, so that the whole rejoicing drama wasfull before him, and seemed merely contrived for his own individualdiversion.
And Ahab, he too was standing on his quarter-deck, shaggy and black,with a stubborn gloom; and as the two ships crossed each other'swakes--one all jubilations for things passed, the other allforebodings as to things to come--their two captains in themselvesimpersonated the whole striking contrast of the scene.
"Come aboard, come aboard!" cried the gay Bachelor's commander,lifting a glass and a bottle in the air.
"Hast seen the White Whale?" gritted Ahab in reply.
"No; only heard of him; but don't believe in him at all," said theother good-humoredly.
"Come aboard!""Thou art too damned jolly.
Sail on.
Hast lost any men?""Not enough to speak of--two islanders, that's all;--but come aboard,old hearty, come along.
I'll soon take that black from your brow.
Come along, will ye (merry's the play); a full ship andhomeward-bound.
""How wondrous familiar is a fool!" muttered Ahab; then aloud, "Thouart a full ship and homeward bound, thou sayst; well, then, call mean empty ship, and outward-bound.
So go thy ways, and I will mine.
Forward there! Set all sail, and keep her to the wind!"And thus, while the one ship went cheerily before the breeze, theother stubbornly fought against it; and so the two vessels parted;the crew of the Pequod looking with grave, lingering glances towardsthe receding Bachelor; but the Bachelor's men never heeding theirgaze for the lively revelry they were in.
And as Ahab, leaning overthe taffrail, eyed the homewardbound craft, he took from his pocket asmall vial of sand, and then looking from the ship to the vial,seemed thereby bringing two remote associations together, for thatvial was filled with Nantucket soundings.
The Dying Whale.
Not seldom in this life, when, on the right side, fortune's favouritessail close by us, we, though all adroop before, catch somewhat of therushing breeze, and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out.
Soseemed it with the Pequod.
For next day after encountering the gayBachelor, whales were seen and four were slain; and one of them byAhab.
It was far down the afternoon; and when all the spearings of thecrimson fight were done: and floating in the lovely sunset sea andsky, sun and whale both stilly died together; then, such a sweetnessand such plaintiveness, such inwreathing orisons curled up in thatrosy air, that it almost seemed as if far over from the deep greenconvent valleys of the Manilla isles, the Spanish land-breeze,wantonly turned sailor, had gone to sea, freighted with these vesperhymns.
Soothed again, but only soothed to deeper gloom, Ahab, who hadsterned off from the whale, sat intently watching his final waningsfrom the now tranquil boat.
For that strange spectacle observable inall sperm whales dying--the turning sunwards of the head, and soexpiring--that strange spectacle, beheld of such a placid evening,somehow to Ahab conveyed a wondrousness unknown before.
"He turns and turns him to it,--how slowly, but how steadfastly, hishomage-rendering and invoking brow, with his last dying motions.
Hetoo worships fire; most faithful, broad, baronial vassal of thesun!--Oh that these too-favouring eyes should see these too-favouringsights.
Look! here, far water-locked; beyond all hum of human wealor woe; in these most candid and impartial seas; where to traditionsno rocks furnish tablets; where for long Chinese ages, the billowshave still rolled on speechless and unspoken to, as stars that shineupon the Niger's unknown source; here, too, life dies sunwards fullof faith; but see! no sooner dead, than death whirls round thecorpse, and it heads some other way.
"Oh, thou dark Hindoo half of nature, who of drowned bones hastbuilded thy separate throne somewhere in the heart of theseunverdured seas; thou art an infidel, thou queen, and too trulyspeakest to me in the wide-slaughtering Typhoon, and the hushedburial of its after calm.
Nor has this thy whale sunwards turned hisdying head, and then gone round again, without a lesson to me.
"Oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power! Oh, high aspiring,rainbowed jet!--that one strivest, this one jettest all in vain! Invain, oh whale, dost thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickeningsun, that only calls forth life, but gives it not again.
Yet dostthou, darker half, rock me with a prouder, if a darker faith.
Allthy unnamable imminglings float beneath me here; I am buoyed bybreaths of once living things, exhaled as air, but water now.
"Then hail, for ever hail, O sea, in whose eternal tossings the wildfowl finds his only rest.
Born of earth, yet suckled by the sea;though hill and valley mothered me, ye billows are myfoster-brothers!"The Whale Watch.
The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart; one, far towindward; one, less distant, to leeward; one ahead; one astern.
These last three were brought alongside ere nightfall; but thewindward one could not be reached till morning; and the boat that hadkilled it lay by its side all night; and that boat was Ahab's.
The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale's spout-hole;and the lantern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flickeringglare upon the black, glossy back, and far out upon the midnightwaves, which gently chafed the whale's broad flank, like soft surfupon a beach.
Ahab and all his boat's crew seemed asleep but the Parsee; whocrouching in the bow, sat watching the sharks, that spectrally playedround the whale, and tapped the light cedar planks with their tails.
A sound like the moaning in squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgivenghosts of Gomorrah, ran shuddering through the air.
Started from his slumbers, Ahab, face to face, saw the Parsee; andhooped round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in aflooded world.
"I have dreamed it again," said he.
"Of the hearses? Have I not said, old man, that neither hearse norcoffin can be thine?""And who are hearsed that die on the sea?""But I said, old man, that ere thou couldst die on this voyage, twohearses must verily be seen by thee on the sea; the first not made bymortal hands; and the visible wood of the last one must be grown inAmerica.
""Aye, aye! a strange sight that, Parsee:--a hearse and its plumesfloating over the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers.
Ha!Such a sight we shall not soon see.
""Believe it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man.
""And what was that saying about thyself?""Though it come to the last, I shall still go before thee thy pilot.
""And when thou art so gone before--if that ever befall--then ere Ican follow, thou must still appear to me, to pilot me still?--Was itnot so? Well, then, did I believe all ye say, oh my pilot! I havehere two pledges that I shall yet slay Moby Dick and survive it.
""Take another pledge, old man," said the Parsee, as his eyes lightedup like fire-flies in the gloom--"Hemp only can kill thee.
""The gallows, ye mean.
--I am immortal then, on land and on sea,"cried Ahab, with a laugh of derision;--"Immortal on land and on sea!"Both were silent again, as one man.
The grey dawn came on, and theslumbering crew arose from the boat's bottom, and ere noon the deadwhale was brought to the ship.
The Quadrant.
The season for the Line at length drew near; and every day when Ahab,coming from his cabin, cast his eyes aloft, the vigilant helmsmanwould ostentatiously handle his spokes, and the eager marinersquickly run to the braces, and would stand there with all their eyescentrally fixed on the nailed doubloon; impatient for the order topoint the ship's prow for the equator.
In good time the order came.
It was hard upon high noon; and Ahab, seated in the bows of hishigh-hoisted boat, was about taking his wonted daily observation ofthe sun to determine his latitude.
Now, in that Japanese sea, the days in summer are as freshets ofeffulgences.
That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun seems the blazingfocus of the glassy ocean's immeasurable burning-glass.
The skylooks lacquered; clouds there are none; the horizon floats; and thisnakedness of unrelieved radiance is as the insufferable splendors ofGod's throne.
Well that Ahab's quadrant was furnished with colouredglasses, through which to take sight of that solar fire.
So,swinging his seated form to the roll of the ship, and with hisastrological-looking instrument placed to his eye, he remained inthat posture for some moments to catch the precise instant when thesun should gain its precise meridian.
Meantime while his wholeattention was absorbed, the Parsee was kneeling beneath him on theship's deck, and with face thrown up like Ahab's, was eyeing the samesun with him; only the lids of his eyes half hooded their orbs, andhis wild face was subdued to an earthly passionlessness.
At lengththe desired observation was taken; and with his pencil upon his ivoryleg, Ahab soon calculated what his latitude must be at that preciseinstant.
Then falling into a moment's revery, he again looked uptowards the sun and murmured to himself: "Thou sea-mark! thou highand mighty Pilot! thou tellest me truly where I AM--but canst thoucast the least hint where I SHALL be? Or canst thou tell where someother thing besides me is this moment living? Where is Moby Dick?This instant thou must be eyeing him.
These eyes of mine look intothe very eye that is even now beholding him; aye, and into the eyethat is even now equally beholding the objects on the unknown,thither side of thee, thou sun!"Then gazing at his quadrant, and handling, one after the other, itsnumerous cabalistical contrivances, he pondered again, and muttered:"Foolish toy! babies' plaything of haughty Admirals, and Commodores,and Captains; the world brags of thee, of thy cunning and might; butwhat after all canst thou do, but tell the poor, pitiful point, wherethou thyself happenest to be on this wide planet, and the hand thatholds thee: no! not one jot more! Thou canst not tell where one dropof water or one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon; and yet withthy impotence thou insultest the sun! Science! Curse thee, thouvain toy; and cursed be all the things that cast man's eyes aloft tothat heaven, whose live vividness but scorches him, as these old eyesare even now scorched with thy light, O sun! Level by nature to thisearth's horizon are the glances of man's eyes; not shot from thecrown of his head, as if God had meant him to gaze on his firmament.
Curse thee, thou quadrant!" dashing it to the deck, "no longer will Iguide my earthly way by thee; the level ship's compass, and the leveldeadreckoning, by log and by line; THESE shall conduct me, and showme my place on the sea.
Aye," lighting from the boat to the deck,"thus I trample on thee, thou paltry thing that feebly pointest onhigh; thus I split and destroy thee!"As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his live anddead feet, a sneering triumph that seemed meant for Ahab, and afatalistic despair that seemed meant for himself--these passed overthe mute, motionless Parsee's face.
Unobserved he rose and glidedaway; while, awestruck by the aspect of their commander, the seamenclustered together on the forecastle, till Ahab, troubledly pacingthe deck, shouted out--"To the braces! Up helm!--square in!"In an instant the yards swung round; and as the ship half-wheeledupon her heel, her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poisedupon her long, ribbed hull, seemed as the three Horatii pirouettingon one sufficient steed.
Standing between the knight-heads, Starbuck watched the Pequod'stumultuous way, and Ahab's also, as he went lurching along the deck.
"I have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow, fullof its tormented flaming life; and I have seen it wane at last, down,down, to dumbest dust.
Old man of oceans! of all this fiery life ofthine, what will at length remain but one little heap of ashes!""Aye," cried Stubb, "but sea-coal ashes--mind ye that, Mr.
Starbuck--sea-coal, not your common charcoal.
Well, well; I heardAhab mutter, 'Here some one thrusts these cards into these old handsof mine; swears that I must play them, and no others.
' And damn me,Ahab, but thou actest right; live in the game, and die in it!"The Candles.
Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs: the tiger of Bengalcrouches in spiced groves of ceaseless verdure.
Skies the mosteffulgent but basket the deadliest thunders: gorgeous Cuba knowstornadoes that never swept tame northern lands.
So, too, it is, thatin these resplendent Japanese seas the mariner encounters the direstof all storms, the Typhoon.
It will sometimes burst from out thatcloudless sky, like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and sleepy town.
Towards evening of that day, the Pequod was torn of her canvas, andbare-poled was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck her directlyahead.
When darkness came on, sky and sea roared and split with thethunder, and blazed with the lightning, that showed the disabledmasts fluttering here and there with the rags which the first fury ofthe tempest had left for its after sport.
Holding by a shroud, Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck; atevery flash of the lightning glancing aloft, to see what additionaldisaster might have befallen the intricate hamper there; while Stubband Flask were directing the men in the higher hoisting and firmerlashing of the boats.
But all their pains seemed naught.
Thoughlifted to the very top of the cranes, the windward quarter boat(Ahab's) did not escape.
A great rolling sea, dashing high upagainst the reeling ship's high teetering side, stove in the boat'sbottom at the stern, and left it again, all dripping through like asieve.
"Bad work, bad work! Mr.
Starbuck," said Stubb, regarding the wreck,"but the sea will have its way.
Stubb, for one, can't fight it.
Yousee, Mr.
Starbuck, a wave has such a great long start before itleaps, all round the world it runs, and then comes the spring! Butas for me, all the start I have to meet it, is just across the deckhere.
But never mind; it's all in fun: so the old songsays;"--(SINGS.
)Oh! jolly is the gale,And a joker is the whale,A' flourishin' his tail,--Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!The scud all a flyin',That's his flip only foamin';When he stirs in the spicin',--Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!Thunder splits the ships,But he only smacks his lips,A tastin' of this flip,--Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!"Avast Stubb," cried Starbuck, "let the Typhoon sing, and strike hisharp here in our rigging; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt holdthy peace.
""But I am not a brave man; never said I was a brave man; I am acoward; and I sing to keep up my spirits.
And I tell you what it is,Mr.
Starbuck, there's no way to stop my singing in this world but tocut my throat.
And when that's done, ten to one I sing ye thedoxology for a wind-up.
""Madman! look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own.
""What! how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else,never mind how foolish?""Here!" cried Starbuck, seizing Stubb by the shoulder, and pointinghis hand towards the weather bow, "markest thou not that the galecomes from the eastward, the very course Ahab is to run for MobyDick? the very course he swung to this day noon? now mark his boatthere; where is that stove? In the stern-sheets, man; where he iswont to stand--his stand-point is stove, man! Now jump overboard,and sing away, if thou must!"I don't half understand ye: what's in the wind?""Yes, yes, round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way toNantucket," soliloquized Starbuck suddenly, heedless of Stubb'squestion.
"The gale that now hammers at us to stave us, we can turnit into a fair wind that will drive us towards home.
Yonder, towindward, all is blackness of doom; but to leeward, homeward--I seeit lightens up there; but not with the lightning.
"At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness,following the flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and almost atthe same instant a volley of thunder peals rolled overhead.
"Who's there?""Old Thunder!" said Ahab, groping his way along the bulwarks to hispivot-hole; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him byelbowed lances of fire.
Now, as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carryoff the perilous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at seasome ships carry to each mast, is intended to conduct it into thewater.
But as this conductor must descend to considerable depth,that its end may avoid all contact with the hull; and as moreover, ifkept constantly towing there, it would be liable to many mishaps,besides interfering not a little with some of the rigging, and moreor less impeding the vessel's way in the water; because of all this,the lower parts of a ship's lightning-rods are not always overboard;but are generally made in long slender links, so as to be the morereadily hauled up into the chains outside, or thrown down into thesea, as occasion may require.
"The rods! the rods!" cried Starbuck to the crew, suddenly admonishedto vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been dartingflambeaux, to light Ahab to his post.
"Are they overboard? drop themover, fore and aft.
Quick!""Avast!" cried Ahab; "let's have fair play here, though we be theweaker side.
Yet I'll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs andAndes, that all the world may be secured; but out on privileges! Letthem be, sir.
""Look aloft!" cried Starbuck.
"The corpusants! the corpusants!All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire; and touched at eachtri-pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames, eachof the three tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air,like three gigantic wax tapers before an altar.
"Blast the boat! let it go!" cried Stubb at this instant, as aswashing sea heaved up under his own little craft, so that itsgunwale violently jammed his hand, as he was passing a lashing.
"Blast it!"--but slipping backward on the deck, his uplifted eyescaught the flames; and immediately shifting his tone he cried--"Thecorpusants have mercy on us all!"To sailors, oaths are household words; they will swear in the tranceof the calm, and in the teeth of the tempest; they will imprecatecurses from the topsail-yard-arms, when most they teeter over to aseething sea; but in all my voyagings, seldom have I heard a commonoath when God's burning finger has been laid on the ship; when His"Mene, Mene, Tekel Upharsin" has been woven into the shrouds and thecordage.
While this pallidness was burning aloft, few words were heard fromthe enchanted crew; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle,all their eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence, like a far awayconstellation of stars.
Relieved against the ghostly light, thegigantic jet negro, Daggoo, loomed up to thrice his real stature, andseemed the black cloud from which the thunder had come.
The partedmouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white teeth, which strangelygleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants; while lit up bythe preternatural light, Queequeg's tattooing burned like Satanicblue flames on his body.
The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft; and oncemore the Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall.
A moment or two passed, when Starbuck, going forward, pushed againstsome one.
It was Stubb.
"What thinkest thou now, man; I heard thycry; it was not the same in the song.
""No, no, it wasn't; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all; and Ihope they will, still.
But do they only have mercy on longfaces?--have they no bowels for a laugh? And look ye, Mr.
Starbuck--but it's too dark to look.
Hear me, then: I take thatmast-head flame we saw for a sign of good luck; for those masts arerooted in a hold that is going to be chock a' block with sperm-oil,d'ye see; and so, all that sperm will work up into the masts, likesap in a tree.
Yes, our three masts will yet be as three spermaceticandles--that's the good promise we saw.
"At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubb's face slowly beginningto glimmer into sight.
Glancing upwards, he cried: "See! see!" andonce more the high tapering flames were beheld with what seemedredoubled supernaturalness in their pallor.
"The corpusants have mercy on us all," cried Stubb, again.
At the base of the mainmast, full beneath the doubloon and theflame, the Parsee was kneeling in Ahab's front, but with his headbowed away from him; while near by, from the arched and overhangingrigging, where they had just been engaged securing a spar, a numberof the seamen, arrested by the glare, now cohered together, and hungpendulous, like a knot of numbed wasps from a drooping, orchard twig.
In various enchanted attitudes, like the standing, or stepping, orrunning skeletons in Herculaneum, others remained rooted to the deck;but all their eyes upcast.
"Aye, aye, men!" cried Ahab.
"Look up at it; mark it well; the whiteflame but lights the way to the White Whale! Hand me those mainmastlinks there; I would fain feel this pulse, and let mine beat againstit; blood against fire! So.
"Then turning--the last link held fast in his left hand, he put hisfoot upon the Parsee; and with fixed upward eye, and high-flung rightarm, he stood erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames.
"Oh! thou clear spirit of clear fire, whom on these seas I as Persianonce did worship, till in the sacramental act so burned by thee, thatto this hour I bear the scar; I now know thee, thou clear spirit, andI now know that thy right worship is defiance.
To neither love norreverence wilt thou be kind; and e'en for hate thou canst but kill;and all are killed.
No fearless fool now fronts thee.
I own thyspeechless, placeless power; but to the last gasp of my earthquakelife will dispute its unconditional, unintegral mastery in me.
In themidst of the personified impersonal, a personality stands here.
Though but a point at best; whencesoe'er I came; wheresoe'er I go;yet while I earthly live, the queenly personality lives in me, andfeels her royal rights.
But war is pain, and hate is woe.
Come inthy lowest form of love, and I will kneel and kiss thee; but at thyhighest, come as mere supernal power; and though thou launchestnavies of full-freighted worlds, there's that in here that stillremains indifferent.
Oh, thou clear spirit, of thy fire thou madestme, and like a true child of fire, I breathe it back to thee.
"[SUDDEN, REPEATED FLASHES OF LIGHTNING; THE NINE FLAMES LEAPLENGTHWISE TO THRICE THEIR PREVIOUS HEIGHT; AHAB, WITH THE REST,CLOSES HIS EYES, HIS RIGHT HAND PRESSED HARD UPON THEM.
]"I own thy speechless, placeless power; said I not so? Nor was itwrung from me; nor do I now drop these links.
Thou canst blind; butI can then grope.
Thou canst consume; but I can then be ashes.
Takethe homage of these poor eyes, and shutter-hands.
I would not takeit.
The lightning flashes through my skull; mine eye-balls ache andache; my whole beaten brain seems as beheaded, and rolling on somestunning ground.
Oh, oh! Yet blindfold, yet will I talk to thee.
Light though thou be, thou leapest out of darkness; but I am darknessleaping out of light, leaping out of thee! The javelins cease; openeyes; see, or not? There burn the flames! Oh, thou magnanimous! nowI do glory in my genealogy.
But thou art but my fiery father; mysweet mother, I know not.
Oh, cruel! what hast thou done with her?There lies my puzzle; but thine is greater.
Thou knowest not howcame ye, hence callest thyself unbegotten; certainly knowest not thybeginning, hence callest thyself unbegun.
I know that of me, whichthou knowest not of thyself, oh, thou omnipotent.
There is someunsuffusing thing beyond thee, thou clear spirit, to whom all thyeternity is but time, all thy creativeness mechanical.
Through thee,thy flaming self, my scorched eyes do dimly see it.
Oh, thoufoundling fire, thou hermit immemorial, thou too hast thyincommunicable riddle, thy unparticipated grief.
Here again withhaughty agony, I read my sire.
Leap! leap up, and lick the sky! Ileap with thee; I burn with thee; would fain be welded with thee;defyingly I worship thee!""The boat! the boat!" cried Starbuck, "look at thy boat, old man!"Ahab's harpoon, the one forged at Perth's fire, remained firmlylashed in its conspicuous crotch, so that it projected beyond hiswhale-boat's bow; but the sea that had stove its bottom had causedthe loose leather sheath to drop off; and from the keen steel barbthere now came a levelled flame of pale, forked fire.
As the silentharpoon burned there like a serpent's tongue, Starbuck grasped Ahabby the arm--"God, God is against thee, old man; forbear! 'tis anill voyage! ill begun, ill continued; let me square the yards, whilewe may, old man, and make a fair wind of it homewards, to go on abetter voyage than this.
"Overhearing Starbuck, the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to thebraces--though not a sail was left aloft.
For the moment all theaghast mate's thoughts seemed theirs; they raised a half mutinouscry.
But dashing the rattling lightning links to the deck, andsnatching the burning harpoon, Ahab waved it like a torch among them;swearing to transfix with it the first sailor that but cast loose arope's end.
Petrified by his aspect, and still more shrinking fromthe fiery dart that he held, the men fell back in dismay, and Ahabagain spoke:--"All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine; andheart, soul, and body, lungs and life, old Ahab is bound.
And thatye may know to what tune this heart beats; look ye here; thus I blowout the last fear!" And with one blast of his breath he extinguishedthe flame.
As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain, men fly the neighborhoodof some lone, gigantic elm, whose very height and strength but renderit so much the more unsafe, because so much the more a mark forthunderbolts; so at those last words of Ahab's many of the marinersdid run from him in a terror of dismay.
The Deck Towards the End of the First Night Watch.
AHAB STANDING BY THE HELM.
STARBUCK APPROACHING HIM.
We must send down the main-top-sail yard, sir.
The band is workingloose and the lee lift is half-stranded.
Shall I strike it, sir?""Strike nothing; lash it.
If I had sky-sail poles, I'd sway them upnow.
""Sir!--in God's name!--sir?""Well.
""The anchors are working, sir.
Shall I get them inboard?""Strike nothing, and stir nothing, but lash everything.
The windrises, but it has not got up to my table-lands yet.
Quick, and seeto it.
--By masts and keels! he takes me for the hunch-backed skipperof some coasting smack.
Send down my main-top-sail yard! Ho,gluepots! Loftiest trucks were made for wildest winds, and thisbrain-truck of mine now sails amid the cloud-scud.
Shall I strikethat? Oh, none but cowards send down their brain-trucks in tempesttime.
What a hooroosh aloft there! I would e'en take it forsublime, did I not know that the colic is a noisy malady.
Oh, takemedicine, take medicine!"Midnight.
--The Forecastle Bulwarks.
STUBB AND FLASK MOUNTED ON THEM, AND PASSING ADDITIONAL LASHINGS OVERTHE ANCHORS THERE HANGING.
No, Stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please, butyou will never pound into me what you were just now saying.
And howlong ago is it since you said the very contrary? Didn't you once saythat whatever ship Ahab sails in, that ship should pay somethingextra on its insurance policy, just as though it were loaded withpowder barrels aft and boxes of lucifers forward? Stop, now; didn'tyou say so?""Well, suppose I did? What then? I've part changed my flesh sincethat time, why not my mind? Besides, supposing we ARE loaded withpowder barrels aft and lucifers forward; how the devil could thelucifers get afire in this drenching spray here? Why, my little man,you have pretty red hair, but you couldn't get afire now.
Shakeyourself; you're Aquarius, or the water-bearer, Flask; might fillpitchers at your coat collar.
Don't you see, then, that for theseextra risks the Marine Insurance companies have extra guarantees?Here are hydrants, Flask.
But hark, again, and I'll answer ye theother thing.
First take your leg off from the crown of the anchorhere, though, so I can pass the rope; now listen.
What's the mightydifference between holding a mast's lightning-rod in the storm, andstanding close by a mast that hasn't got any lightning-rod at all ina storm? Don't you see, you timber-head, that no harm can come tothe holder of the rod, unless the mast is first struck? What are youtalking about, then? Not one ship in a hundred carries rods, andAhab,--aye, man, and all of us,--were in no more danger then, in mypoor opinion, than all the crews in ten thousand ships now sailingthe seas.
Why, you King-Post, you, I suppose you would have everyman in the world go about with a small lightning-rod running up thecorner of his hat, like a militia officer's skewered feather, andtrailing behind like his sash.
Why don't ye be sensible, Flask? it'seasy to be sensible; why don't ye, then? any man with half an eye canbe sensible.
""I don't know that, Stubb.
You sometimes find it rather hard.
""Yes, when a fellow's soaked through, it's hard to be sensible,that's a fact.
And I am about drenched with this spray.
Never mind;catch the turn there, and pass it.
Seems to me we are lashing downthese anchors now as if they were never going to be used again.
Tying these two anchors here, Flask, seems like tying a man's handsbehind him.
And what big generous hands they are, to be sure.
Theseare your iron fists, hey? What a hold they have, too! I wonder,Flask, whether the world is anchored anywhere; if she is, she swingswith an uncommon long cable, though.
There, hammer that knot down,and we've done.
So; next to touching land, lighting on deck is themost satisfactory.
I say, just wring out my jacket skirts, will ye?Thank ye.
They laugh at long-togs so, Flask; but seems to me, aLong tailed coat ought always to be worn in all storms afloat.
Thetails tapering down that way, serve to carry off the water, d'ye see.
Same with cocked hats; the cocks form gable-end eave-troughs, Flask.
No more monkey-jackets and tarpaulins for me; I must mount aswallow-tail, and drive down a beaver; so.
Halloa! whew! there goesmy tarpaulin overboard; Lord, Lord, that the winds that come fromheaven should be so unmannerly! This is a nasty night, lad.
"Midnight Aloft.
--Thunder and Lightning.
THE MAIN-TOP-SAIL YARD.
--TASHTEGO PASSING NEW LASHINGS AROUND IT.
"Um, um, um.
Stop that thunder! Plenty too much thunder up here.
What's the use of thunder? Um, um, um.
We don't want thunder; wewant rum; give us a glass of rum.
Um, um, um!"The Musket.
During the most violent shocks of the Typhoon, the man at thePequod's jaw-bone tiller had several times been reelingly hurled tothe deck by its spasmodic motions, even though preventer tackles hadbeen attached to it--for they were slack--because some play to thetiller was indispensable.
In a severe gale like this, while the ship is but a tossedshuttlecock to the blast, it is by no means uncommon to see theneedles in the compasses, at intervals, go round and round.
It wasthus with the Pequod's; at almost every shock the helmsman had notfailed to notice the whirling velocity with which they revolved uponthe cards; it is a sight that hardly anyone can behold without somesort of unwonted emotion.
Some hours after midnight, the Typhoon abated so much, that throughthe strenuous exertions of Starbuck and Stubb--one engaged forwardand the other aft--the shivered remnants of the jib and fore andmain-top-sails were cut adrift from the spars, and went eddying awayto leeward, like the feathers of an albatross, which sometimes arecast to the winds when that storm-tossed bird is on the wing.
The three corresponding new sails were now bent and reefed, and astorm-trysail was set further aft; so that the ship soon went throughthe water with some precision again; and the course--for the present,East-south-east--which he was to steer, if practicable, was once moregiven to the helmsman.
For during the violence of the gale, he hadonly steered according to its vicissitudes.
But as he was nowbringing the ship as near her course as possible, watching thecompass meanwhile, lo! a good sign! the wind seemed coming roundastern; aye, the foul breeze became fair!Instantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of "HO! THE FAIRWIND! OH-YE-HO, CHEERLY MEN!" the crew singing for joy, that sopromising an event should so soon have falsified the evil portentspreceding it.
In compliance with the standing order of his commander--to reportimmediately, and at any one of the twenty-four hours, any decidedchange in the affairs of the deck,--Starbuck had no sooner trimmedthe yards to the breeze--however reluctantly and gloomily,--than hemechanically went below to apprise Captain Ahab of the circumstance.
Ere knocking at his state-room, he involuntarily paused before it amoment.
The cabin lamp--taking long swings this way and that--wasburning fitfully, and casting fitful shadows upon the old man'sbolted door,--a thin one, with fixed blinds inserted, in place ofupper panels.
The isolated subterraneousness of the cabin made acertain humming silence to reign there, though it was hooped round byall the roar of the elements.
The loaded muskets in the rack wereshiningly revealed, as they stood upright against the forwardbulkhead.
Starbuck was an honest, upright man; but out of Starbuck'sheart, at that instant when he saw the muskets, there strangelyevolved an evil thought; but so blent with its neutral or goodaccompaniments that for the instant he hardly knew it for itself.
"He would have shot me once," he murmured, "yes, there's the verymusket that he pointed at me;--that one with the studded stock; letme touch it--lift it.
Strange, that I, who have handled so manydeadly lances, strange, that I should shake so now.
Loaded? I mustsee.
Aye, aye; and powder in the pan;--that's not good.
Best spillit?--wait.
I'll cure myself of this.
I'll hold the musket boldlywhile I think.
--I come to report a fair wind to him.
But how fair?Fair for death and doom,--THAT'S fair for Moby Dick.
It's a fairwind that's only fair for that accursed fish.
--The very tube hepointed at me!--the very one; THIS one--I hold it here; he would havekilled me with the very thing I handle now.
--Aye and he would fainkill all his crew.
Does he not say he will not strike his spars toany gale? Has he not dashed his heavenly quadrant? and in these sameperilous seas, gropes he not his way by mere dead reckoning of theerror-abounding log? and in this very Typhoon, did he not swear thathe would have no lightning-rods? But shall this crazed old man betamely suffered to drag a whole ship's company down to doom withhim?--Yes, it would make him the wilful murderer of thirty men andmore, if this ship come to any deadly harm; and come to deadly harm,my soul swears this ship will, if Ahab have his way.
If, then, hewere this instant--put aside, that crime would not be his.
Ha! is hemuttering in his sleep? Yes, just there,--in there, he's sleeping.
Sleeping? aye, but still alive, and soon awake again.
I can'twithstand thee, then, old man.
Not reasoning; not remonstrance; notentreaty wilt thou hearken to; all this thou scornest.
Flatobedience to thy own flat commands, this is all thou breathest.
Aye,and say'st the men have vow'd thy vow; say'st all of us are Ahabs.
Great God forbid!--But is there no other way? no lawful way?--Makehim a prisoner to be taken home? What! hope to wrest this old man'sliving power from his own living hands? Only a fool would try it.
Say he were pinioned even; knotted all over with ropes and hawsers;chained down to ring-bolts on this cabin floor; he would be morehideous than a caged tiger, then.
I could not endure the sight;could not possibly fly his howlings; all comfort, sleep itself,inestimable reason would leave me on the long intolerable voyage.
What, then, remains? The land is hundreds of leagues away, andlocked Japan the nearest.
I stand alone here upon an open sea, withtwo oceans and a whole continent between me and law.
--Aye, aye, 'tisso.
--Is heaven a murderer when its lightning strikes a would-bemurderer in his bed, tindering sheets and skin together?--And would Ibe a murderer, then, if"--and slowly, stealthily, and half sidewayslooking, he placed the loaded musket's end against the door.
"On this level, Ahab's hammock swings within; his head this way.
Atouch, and Starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again.
--OhMary! Mary!--boy! boy! boy!--But if I wake thee not to death, oldman, who can tell to what unsounded deeps Starbuck's body this dayweek may sink, with all the crew! Great God, where art Thou? ShallI? shall I?--The wind has gone down and shifted, sir; the fore andmain topsails are reefed and set; she heads her course.
""Stern all! Oh Moby Dick, I clutch thy heart at last!"Such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man'stormented sleep, as if Starbuck's voice had caused the long dumbdream to speak.
The yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard's arm against thepanel; Starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel; but turning from thedoor, he placed the death-tube in its rack, and left the place.
"He's too sound asleep, Mr.
Stubb; go thou down, and wake him, andtell him.
I must see to the deck here.
Thou know'st what to say.
"The Needle.
Next morning the not-yet-subsided sea rolled in long slow billows ofmighty bulk, and striving in the Pequod's gurgling track, pushed heron like giants' palms outspread.
The strong, unstaggering breezeabounded so, that sky and air seemed vast outbellying sails; thewhole world boomed before the wind.
Muffled in the full morninglight, the invisible sun was only known by the spread intensity ofhis place; where his bayonet rays moved on in stacks.
Emblazonings,as of crowned Babylonian kings and queens, reigned over everything.
The sea was as a crucible of molten gold, that bubblingly leaps withlight and heat.
Long maintaining an enchanted silence, Ahab stood apart; and everytime the tetering ship loweringly pitched down her bowsprit, heturned to eye the bright sun's rays produced ahead; and when sheprofoundly settled by the stern, he turned behind, and saw the sun'srearward place, and how the same yellow rays were blending with hisundeviating wake.
"Ha, ha, my ship! thou mightest well be taken now for the sea-chariotof the sun.
Ho, ho! all ye nations before my prow, I bring the sunto ye! Yoke on the further billows; hallo! a tandem, I drive thesea!"But suddenly reined back by some counter thought, he hurried towardsthe helm, huskily demanding how the ship was heading.
"East-sou-east, sir," said the frightened steersman.
"Thou liest!" smiting him with his clenched fist.
"Heading East atthis hour in the morning, and the sun astern?"Upon this every soul was confounded; for the phenomenon just thenobserved by Ahab had unaccountably escaped every one else; but itsvery blinding palpableness must have been the cause.
Thrusting his head half way into the binnacle, Ahab caught oneglimpse of the compasses; his uplifted arm slowly fell; for a momenthe almost seemed to stagger.
Standing behind him Starbuck looked,and lo! the two compasses pointed East, and the Pequod was asinfallibly going West.
But ere the first wild alarm could get out abroad among the crew, theold man with a rigid laugh exclaimed, "I have it! It has happenedbefore.
Mr.
Starbuck, last night's thunder turned ourcompasses--that's all.
Thou hast before now heard of such a thing, Itake it.
""Aye; but never before has it happened to me, sir," said the palemate, gloomily.
Here, it must needs be said, that accidents like this have in morethan one case occurred to ships in violent storms.
The magneticenergy, as developed in the mariner's needle, is, as all know,essentially one with the electricity beheld in heaven; hence it isnot to be much marvelled at, that such things should be.
Instanceswhere the lightning has actually struck the vessel, so as to smitedown some of the spars and rigging, the effect upon the needle has attimes been still more fatal; all its loadstone virtue beingannihilated, so that the before magnetic steel was of no more usethan an old wife's knitting needle.
But in either case, the needlenever again, of itself, recovers the original virtue thus marred orlost; and if the binnacle compasses be affected, the same fatereaches all the others that may be in the ship; even were thelowermost one inserted into the kelson.
Deliberately standing before the binnacle, and eyeing thetranspointed compasses, the old man, with the sharp of his extendedhand, now took the precise bearing of the sun, and satisfied that theneedles were exactly inverted, shouted out his orders for the ship'scourse to be changed accordingly.
The yards were hard up; and oncemore the Pequod thrust her undaunted bows into the opposing wind, forthe supposed fair one had only been juggling her.
Meanwhile, whatever were his own secret thoughts, Starbuck saidnothing, but quietly he issued all requisite orders; while Stubb andFlask--who in some small degree seemed then to be sharing hisfeelings--likewise unmurmuringly acquiesced.
As for the men, thoughsome of them lowly rumbled, their fear of Ahab was greater than theirfear of Fate.
But as ever before, the pagan harpooneers remainedalmost wholly unimpressed; or if impressed, it was only with acertain magnetism shot into their congenial hearts from inflexibleAhab's.
For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries.
Butchancing to slip with his ivory heel, he saw the crushed coppersight-tubes of the quadrant he had the day before dashed to the deck.
"Thou poor, proud heaven-gazer and sun's pilot! yesterday I wreckedthee, and to-day the compasses would fain have wrecked me.
So, so.
But Ahab is lord over the level loadstone yet.
Mr.
Starbuck--a lancewithout a pole; a top-maul, and the smallest of the sail-maker'sneedles.
Quick!"Accessory, perhaps, to the impulse dictating the thing he was nowabout to do, were certain prudential motives, whose object might havebeen to revive the spirits of his crew by a stroke of his subtileskill, in a matter so wondrous as that of the inverted compasses.
Besides, the old man well knew that to steer by transpointed needles,though clumsily practicable, was not a thing to be passed over bysuperstitious sailors, without some shudderings and evil portents.
"Men," said he, steadily turning upon the crew, as the mate handedhim the things he had demanded, "my men, the thunder turned oldAhab's needles; but out of this bit of steel Ahab can make one of hisown, that will point as true as any.
"Abashed glances of servile wonder were exchanged by the sailors, asthis was said; and with fascinated eyes they awaited whatever magicmight follow.
But Starbuck looked away.
With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel head of thelance, and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining, badehim hold it upright, without its touching the deck.
Then, with themaul, after repeatedly smiting the upper end of this iron rod, heplaced the blunted needle endwise on the top of it, and less stronglyhammered that, several times, the mate still holding the rod asbefore.
Then going through some small strange motions withit--whether indispensable to the magnetizing of the steel, or merelyintended to augment the awe of the crew, is uncertain--he called forlinen thread; and moving to the binnacle, slipped out the tworeversed needles there, and horizontally suspended the sail-needle byits middle, over one of the compass-cards.
At first, the steel wentround and round, quivering and vibrating at either end; but at lastit settled to its place, when Ahab, who had been intently watchingfor this result, stepped frankly back from the binnacle, and pointinghis stretched arm towards it, exclaimed,--"Look ye, for yourselves,if Ahab be not lord of the level loadstone! The sun is East, andthat compass swears it!"One after another they peered in, for nothing but their own eyescould persuade such ignorance as theirs, and one after another theyslunk away.
In his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph, you then saw Ahab in all hisfatal pride.
The Log and Line.
While now the fated Pequod had been so long afloat this voyage, thelog and line had but very seldom been in use.
Owing to a confidentreliance upon other means of determining the vessel's place, somemerchantmen, and many whalemen, especially when cruising, whollyneglect to heave the log; though at the same time, and frequentlymore for form's sake than anything else, regularly putting down uponthe customary slate the course steered by the ship, as well as thepresumed average rate of progression every hour.
It had been thuswith the Pequod.
The wooden reel and angular log attached hung, longuntouched, just beneath the railing of the after bulwarks.
Rains andspray had damped it; sun and wind had warped it; all the elementshad combined to rot a thing that hung so idly.
But heedless of allthis, his mood seized Ahab, as he happened to glance upon the reel,not many hours after the magnet scene, and he remembered how hisquadrant was no more, and recalled his frantic oath about the levellog and line.
The ship was sailing plungingly; astern the billowsrolled in riots.
"Forward, there! Heave the log!"Two seamen came.
The golden-hued Tahitian and the grizzly Manxman.
"Take the reel, one of ye, I'll heave.
"They went towards the extreme stern, on the ship's lee side, wherethe deck, with the oblique energy of the wind, was now almost dippinginto the creamy, sidelong-rushing sea.
The Manxman took the reel, and holding it high up, by the projectinghandle-ends of the spindle, round which the spool of line revolved,so stood with the angular log hanging downwards, till Ahab advancedto him.
Ahab stood before him, and was lightly unwinding some thirty or fortyturns to form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard, when the oldManxman, who was intently eyeing both him and the line, made bold tospeak.
"Sir, I mistrust it; this line looks far gone, long heat and wet havespoiled it.
""'Twill hold, old gentleman.
Long heat and wet, have they spoiledthee? Thou seem'st to hold.
Or, truer perhaps, life holds thee;not thou it.
""I hold the spool, sir.
But just as my captain says.
With thesegrey hairs of mine 'tis not worth while disputing, 'specially with asuperior, who'll ne'er confess.
""What's that? There now's a patched professor in Queen Nature'sgranite-founded College; but methinks he's too subservient.
Wherewert thou born?""In the little rocky Isle of Man, sir.
""Excellent! Thou'st hit the world by that.
""I know not, sir, but I was born there.
""In the Isle of Man, hey? Well, the other way, it's good.
Here's aman from Man; a man born in once independent Man, and now unmanned ofMan; which is sucked in--by what? Up with the reel! The dead, blindwall butts all inquiring heads at last.
Up with it! So.
"The log was heaved.
The loose coils rapidly straightened out in along dragging line astern, and then, instantly, the reel began towhirl.
In turn, jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling billows,the towing resistance of the log caused the old reelman to staggerstrangely.
"Hold hard!"Snap! the overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon; thetugging log was gone.
"I crush the quadrant, the thunder turns the needles, and now the madsea parts the log-line.
But Ahab can mend all.
Haul in here,Tahitian; reel up, Manxman.
And look ye, let the carpenter makeanother log, and mend thou the line.
See to it.
""There he goes now; to him nothing's happened; but to me, the skewerseems loosening out of the middle of the world.
Haul in, haul in,Tahitian! These lines run whole, and whirling out: come in broken,and dragging slow.
Ha, Pip? come to help; eh, Pip?""Pip? whom call ye Pip? Pip jumped from the whale-boat.
Pip'smissing.
Let's see now if ye haven't fished him up here, fisherman.
It drags hard; I guess he's holding on.
Jerk him, Tahiti! Jerk himoff; we haul in no cowards here.
Ho! there's his arm just breakingwater.
A hatchet! a hatchet! cut it off--we haul in no cowards here.
Captain Ahab! sir, sir! here's Pip, trying to get on board again.
""Peace, thou crazy loon," cried the Manxman, seizing him by the arm.
"Away from the quarter-deck!""The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser," muttered Ahab, advancing.
"Hands off from that holiness! Where sayest thou Pip was, boy?"Astern there, sir, astern! Lo! lo!""And who art thou, boy? I see not my reflection in the vacant pupilsof thy eyes.
Oh God! that man should be a thing for immortal soulsto sieve through! Who art thou, boy?""Bell-boy, sir; ship's-crier; ding, dong, ding! Pip! Pip! Pip! Onehundred pounds of clay reward for Pip; five feet high--lookscowardly--quickest known by that! Ding, dong, ding! Who's seen Pipthe coward?""There can be no hearts above the snow-line.
Oh, ye frozen heavens!look down here.
Ye did beget this luckless child, and have abandonedhim, ye creative libertines.
Here, boy; Ahab's cabin shall be Pip'shome henceforth, while Ahab lives.
Thou touchest my inmost centre,boy; thou art tied to me by cords woven of my heart-strings.
Come,let's down.
""What's this? here's velvet shark-skin," intently gazing at Ahab'shand, and feeling it.
"Ah, now, had poor Pip but felt so kind athing as this, perhaps he had ne'er been lost! This seems to me,sir, as a man-rope; something that weak souls may hold by.
Oh, sir,let old Perth now come and rivet these two hands together; the blackone with the white, for I will not let this go.
""Oh, boy, nor will I thee, unless I should thereby drag thee to worsehorrors than are here.
Come, then, to my cabin.
Lo! ye believers ingods all goodness, and in man all ill, lo you! see the omniscientgods oblivious of suffering man; and man, though idiotic, and knowingnot what he does, yet full of the sweet things of love and gratitude.
Come! I feel prouder leading thee by thy black hand, than though Igrasped an Emperor's!""There go two daft ones now," muttered the old Manxman.
"One daftwith strength, the other daft with weakness.
But here's the end ofthe rotten line--all dripping, too.
Mend it, eh? I think we hadbest have a new line altogether.
I'll see Mr.
Stubb about it.
"The Life-Buoy.
Steering now south-eastward by Ahab's levelled steel, and herprogress solely determined by Ahab's level log and line; the Pequodheld on her path towards the Equator.
Making so long a passagethrough such unfrequented waters, descrying no ships, and ere long,sideways impelled by unvarying trade winds, over waves monotonouslymild; all these seemed the strange calm things preluding some riotousand desperate scene.
At last, when the ship drew near to the outskirts, as it were, of theEquatorial fishing-ground, and in the deep darkness that goes beforethe dawn, was sailing by a cluster of rocky islets; the watch--thenheaded by Flask--was startled by a cry so plaintively wild andunearthly--like half-articulated wailings of the ghosts of allHerod's murdered Innocents--that one and all, they started from theirreveries, and for the space of some moments stood, or sat, or leanedall transfixedly listening, like the carved Roman slave, while thatwild cry remained within hearing.
The Christian or civilized part ofthe crew said it was mermaids, and shuddered; but the paganharpooneers remained unappalled.
Yet the grey Manxman--the oldestmariner of all--declared that the wild thrilling sounds that wereheard, were the voices of newly drowned men in the sea.
Below in his hammock, Ahab did not hear of this till grey dawn, whenhe came to the deck; it was then recounted to him by Flask, notunaccompanied with hinted dark meanings.
He hollowly laughed, andthus explained the wonder.
Those rocky islands the ship had passed were the resort of greatnumbers of seals, and some young seals that had lost their dams, orsome dams that had lost their cubs, must have risen nigh the ship andkept company with her, crying and sobbing with their human sort ofwail.
But this only the more affected some of them, because mostmariners cherish a very superstitious feeling about seals, arisingnot only from their peculiar tones when in distress, but also fromthe human look of their round heads and semi-intelligent faces, seenpeeringly uprising from the water alongside.
In the sea, undercertain circumstances, seals have more than once been mistaken formen.
But the bodings of the crew were destined to receive a most plausibleconfirmation in the fate of one of their number that morning.
Atsun-rise this man went from his hammock to his mast-head at the fore;and whether it was that he was not yet half waked from his sleep (forsailors sometimes go aloft in a transition state), whether it wasthus with the man, there is now no telling; but, be that as it may,he had not been long at his perch, when a cry was heard--a cry and arushing--and looking up, they saw a falling phantom in the air; andlooking down, a little tossed heap of white bubbles in the blue ofthe sea.
The life-buoy--a long slender cask--was dropped from the stern, whereit always hung obedient to a cunning spring; but no hand rose toseize it, and the sun having long beat upon this cask it hadshrunken, so that it slowly filled, and that parched wood alsofilled at its every pore; and the studded iron-bound cask followedthe sailor to the bottom, as if to yield him his pillow, though insooth but a hard one.
And thus the first man of the Pequod that mounted the mast to lookout for the White Whale, on the White Whale's own peculiar ground;that man was swallowed up in the deep.
But few, perhaps, thought ofthat at the time.
Indeed, in some sort, they were not grieved atthis event, at least as a portent; for they regarded it, not as aforeshadowing of evil in the future, but as the fulfilment of anevil already presaged.
They declared that now they knew the reasonof those wild shrieks they had heard the night before.
But again theold Manxman said nay.
The lost life-buoy was now to be replaced; Starbuck was directed tosee to it; but as no cask of sufficient lightness could be found, andas in the feverish eagerness of what seemed the approaching crisis ofthe voyage, all hands were impatient of any toil but what wasdirectly connected with its final end, whatever that might prove tobe; therefore, they were going to leave the ship's stern unprovidedwith a buoy, when by certain strange signs and inuendoes Queequeghinted a hint concerning his coffin.
"A life-buoy of a coffin!" cried Starbuck, starting.
"Rather queer, that, I should say," said Stubb.
"It will make a good enough one," said Flask, "the carpenter here canarrange it easily.
""Bring it up; there's nothing else for it," said Starbuck, after amelancholy pause.
"Rig it, carpenter; do not look at me so--thecoffin, I mean.
Dost thou hear me? Rig it.
""And shall I nail down the lid, sir?" moving his hand as with ahammer.
"Aye.
""And shall I caulk the seams, sir?" moving his hand as with acaulking-iron.
"Aye.
""And shall I then pay over the same with pitch, sir?" moving his handas with a pitch-pot.
"Away! what possesses thee to this? Make a life-buoy of the coffin,and no more.
--Mr.
Stubb, Mr.
Flask, come forward with me.
""He goes off in a huff.
The whole he can endure; at the parts hebaulks.
Now I don't like this.
I make a leg for Captain Ahab, andhe wears it like a gentleman; but I make a bandbox for Queequeg, andhe won't put his head into it.
Are all my pains to go for nothingwith that coffin? And now I'm ordered to make a life-buoy of it.
It's like turning an old coat; going to bring the flesh on the otherside now.
I don't like this cobbling sort of business--I don't likeit at all; it's undignified; it's not my place.
Let tinkers' bratsdo tinkerings; we are their betters.
I like to take in hand none butclean, virgin, fair-and-square mathematical jobs, something thatregularly begins at the beginning, and is at the middle when midway,and comes to an end at the conclusion; not a cobbler's job, that's atan end in the middle, and at the beginning at the end.
It's the oldwoman's tricks to be giving cobbling jobs.
Lord! what an affectionall old women have for tinkers.
I know an old woman of sixty-fivewho ran away with a bald-headed young tinker once.
And that's thereason I never would work for lonely widow old women ashore, when Ikept my job-shop in the Vineyard; they might have taken it into theirlonely old heads to run off with me.
But heigh-ho! there are no capsat sea but snow-caps.
Let me see.
Nail down the lid; caulk theseams; pay over the same with pitch; batten them down tight, and hangit with the snap-spring over the ship's stern.
Were ever such thingsdone before with a coffin? Some superstitious old carpenters, now,would be tied up in the rigging, ere they would do the job.
But I'mmade of knotty Aroostook hemlock; I don't budge.
Cruppered with acoffin! Sailing about with a grave-yard tray! But never mind.
Weworkers in woods make bridal-bedsteads and card-tables, as well ascoffins and hearses.
We work by the month, or by the job, or by theprofit; not for us to ask the why and wherefore of our work, unlessit be too confounded cobbling, and then we stash it if we can.
Hem!I'll do the job, now, tenderly.
I'll have me--let's see--how many inthe ship's company, all told? But I've forgotten.
Any way, I'llhave me thirty separate, Turk's-headed life-lines, each three feetlong hanging all round to the coffin.
Then, if the hull go down,there'll be thirty lively fellows all fighting for one coffin, asight not seen very often beneath the sun! Come hammer,caulking-iron, pitch-pot, and marling-spike! Let's to it.
"The Deck.
THE COFFIN LAID UPON TWO LINE-TUBS, BETWEEN THE VICE-BENCH AND THEOPEN HATCHWAY; THE CARPENTER CAULKING ITS SEAMS; THE STRING OFTWISTED OAKUM SLOWLY UNWINDING FROM A LARGE ROLL OF IT PLACED IN THEBOSOM OF HIS FROCK.
--AHAB COMES SLOWLY FROM THE CABIN-GANGWAY, ANDHEARS PIP FOLLOWING HIM.
Back, lad; I will be with ye again presently.
He goes! Not thishand complies with my humor more genially than that boy.
--Middleaisle of a church! What's here?""Life-buoy, sir.
Mr.
Starbuck's orders.
Oh, look, sir! Beware thehatchway!""Thank ye, man.
Thy coffin lies handy to the vault.
""Sir? The hatchway? oh! So it does, sir, so it does.
""Art not thou the leg-maker? Look, did not this stump come from thyshop?""I believe it did, sir; does the ferrule stand, sir?""Well enough.
But art thou not also the undertaker?""Aye, sir; I patched up this thing here as a coffin for Queequeg; butthey've set me now to turning it into something else.
""Then tell me; art thou not an arrant, all-grasping, intermeddling,monopolising, heathenish old scamp, to be one day making legs, andthe next day coffins to clap them in, and yet again life-buoys out ofthose same coffins? Thou art as unprincipled as the gods, and asmuch of a jack-of-all-trades.
""But I do not mean anything, sir.
I do as I do.
""The gods again.
Hark ye, dost thou not ever sing working about acoffin? The Titans, they say, hummed snatches when chipping out thecraters for volcanoes; and the grave-digger in the play sings, spadein hand.
Dost thou never?""Sing, sir? Do I sing? Oh, I'm indifferent enough, sir, for that;but the reason why the grave-digger made music must have been becausethere was none in his spade, sir.
But the caulking mallet is full ofit.
Hark to it.
""Aye, and that's because the lid there's a sounding-board; and whatin all things makes the sounding-board is this--there's naughtbeneath.
And yet, a coffin with a body in it rings pretty much thesame, Carpenter.
Hast thou ever helped carry a bier, and heard thecoffin knock against the churchyard gate, going in?"Faith, sir, I've--""Faith? What's that?""Why, faith, sir, it's only a sort of exclamation-like--that's all,sir.
""Um, um; go on.
""I was about to say, sir, that--""Art thou a silk-worm? Dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thyself?Look at thy bosom! Despatch! and get these traps out of sight.
""He goes aft.
That was sudden, now; but squalls come sudden in hotlatitudes.
I've heard that the Isle of Albemarle, one of theGallipagos, is cut by the Equator right in the middle.
Seems to mesome sort of Equator cuts yon old man, too, right in his middle.
He's always under the Line--fiery hot, I tell ye! He's looking thisway--come, oakum; quick.
Here we go again.
This wooden mallet isthe cork, and I'm the professor of musical glasses--tap, tap!"(AHAB TO HIMSELF.
)"There's a sight! There's a sound! The grey-headed woodpeckertapping the hollow tree! Blind and dumb might well be envied now.
See! that thing rests on two line-tubs, full of tow-lines.
A mostmalicious wag, that fellow.
Rat-tat! So man's seconds tick! Oh!how immaterial are all materials! What things real are there, butimponderable thoughts? Here now's the very dreaded symbol of grimdeath, by a mere hap, made the expressive sign of the help and hopeof most endangered life.
A life-buoy of a coffin! Does it gofurther? Can it be that in some spiritual sense the coffin is, afterall, but an immortality-preserver! I'll think of that.
But no.
Sofar gone am I in the dark side of earth, that its other side, thetheoretic bright one, seems but uncertain twilight to me.
Will yenever have done, Carpenter, with that accursed sound? I go below;let me not see that thing here when I return again.
Now, then, Pip,we'll talk this over; I do suck most wondrous philosophies from thee!Some unknown conduits from the unknown worlds must empty into thee!"The Pequod Meets The Rachel.
Next day, a large ship, the Rachel, was descried, bearing directlydown upon the Pequod, all her spars thickly clustering with men.
Atthe time the Pequod was making good speed through the water; but asthe broad-winged windward stranger shot nigh to her, the boastfulsails all fell together as blank bladders that are burst, and alllife fled from the smitten hull.
"Bad news; she brings bad news," muttered the old Manxman.
But ereher commander, who, with trumpet to mouth, stood up in his boat; erehe could hopefully hail, Ahab's voice was heard.
"Hast seen the White Whale?""Aye, yesterday.
Have ye seen a whale-boat adrift?"Throttling his joy, Ahab negatively answered this unexpectedquestion; and would then have fain boarded the stranger, when thestranger captain himself, having stopped his vessel's way, was seendescending her side.
A few keen pulls, and his boat-hook soonclinched the Pequod's main-chains, and he sprang to the deck.
Immediately he was recognised by Ahab for a Nantucketer he knew.
Butno formal salutation was exchanged.
"Where was he?--not killed!--not killed!" cried Ahab, closelyadvancing.
"How was it?"It seemed that somewhat late on the afternoon of the day previous,while three of the stranger's boats were engaged with a shoal ofwhales, which had led them some four or five miles from the ship; andwhile they were yet in swift chase to windward, the white hump andhead of Moby Dick had suddenly loomed up out of the water, not veryfar to leeward; whereupon, the fourth rigged boat--a reservedone--had been instantly lowered in chase.
After a keen sail beforethe wind, this fourth boat--the swiftest keeled of all--seemed tohave succeeded in fastening--at least, as well as the man at themast-head could tell anything about it.
In the distance he saw thediminished dotted boat; and then a swift gleam of bubbling whitewater; and after that nothing more; whence it was concluded that thestricken whale must have indefinitely run away with his pursuers, asoften happens.
There was some apprehension, but no positive alarm,as yet.
The recall signals were placed in the rigging; darkness cameon; and forced to pick up her three far to windward boats--ere goingin quest of the fourth one in the precisely opposite direction--theship had not only been necessitated to leave that boat to its fatetill near midnight, but, for the time, to increase her distance fromit.
But the rest of her crew being at last safe aboard, she crowdedall sail--stunsail on stunsail--after the missing boat; kindling afire in her try-pots for a beacon; and every other man aloft on thelook-out.
But though when she had thus sailed a sufficient distanceto gain the presumed place of the absent ones when last seen; thoughshe then paused to lower her spare boats to pull all around her; andnot finding anything, had again dashed on; again paused, and loweredher boats; and though she had thus continued doing till daylight;yet not the least glimpse of the missing keel had been seen.
The story told, the stranger Captain immediately went on to revealhis object in boarding the Pequod.
He desired that ship to unitewith his own in the search; by sailing over the sea some four or fivemiles apart, on parallel lines, and so sweeping a double horizon, asit were.
"I will wager something now," whispered Stubb to Flask, "that someone in that missing boat wore off that Captain's best coat; mayhap,his watch--he's so cursed anxious to get it back.
Who ever heard oftwo pious whale-ships cruising after one missing whale-boat in theheight of the whaling season? See, Flask, only see how pale helooks--pale in the very buttons of his eyes--look--it wasn't thecoat--it must have been the--""My boy, my own boy is among them.
For God's sake--I beg, Iconjure"--here exclaimed the stranger Captain to Ahab, who thus farhad but icily received his petition.
"For eight-and-forty hours letme charter your ship--I will gladly pay for it, and roundly pay forit--if there be no other way--for eight-and-forty hours only--onlythat--you must, oh, you must, and you SHALL do this thing.
""His son!" cried Stubb, "oh, it's his son he's lost! I take back thecoat and watch--what says Ahab? We must save that boy.
""He's drowned with the rest on 'em, last night," said the old Manxsailor standing behind them; "I heard; all of ye heard theirspirits.
"Now, as it shortly turned out, what made this incident of theRachel's the more melancholy, was the circumstance, that not only wasone of the Captain's sons among the number of the missing boat'screw; but among the number of the other boat's crews, at the sametime, but on the other hand, separated from the ship during the darkvicissitudes of the chase, there had been still another son; as thatfor a time, the wretched father was plunged to the bottom of thecruellest perplexity; which was only solved for him by his chiefmate's instinctively adopting the ordinary procedure of a whale-shipin such emergencies, that is, when placed between jeopardized butdivided boats, always to pick up the majority first.
But thecaptain, for some unknown constitutional reason, had refrained frommentioning all this, and not till forced to it by Ahab's iciness didhe allude to his one yet missing boy; a little lad, but twelve yearsold, whose father with the earnest but unmisgiving hardihood of aNantucketer's paternal love, had thus early sought to initiate him inthe perils and wonders of a vocation almost immemorially the destinyof all his race.
Nor does it unfrequently occur, that Nantucketcaptains will send a son of such tender age away from them, for aprotracted three or four years' voyage in some other ship than theirown; so that their first knowledge of a whaleman's career shall beunenervated by any chance display of a father's natural but untimelypartiality, or undue apprehensiveness and concern.
Meantime, now the stranger was still beseeching his poor boon ofAhab; and Ahab still stood like an anvil, receiving every shock, butwithout the least quivering of his own.
"I will not go," said the stranger, "till you say aye to me.
Do tome as you would have me do to you in the like case.
For YOU too havea boy, Captain Ahab--though but a child, and nestling safely at homenow--a child of your old age too--Yes, yes, you relent; I seeit--run, run, men, now, and stand by to square in the yards.
""Avast," cried Ahab--"touch not a rope-yarn"; then in a voice thatprolongingly moulded every word--"Captain Gardiner, I will not do it.
Even now I lose time.
Good-bye, good-bye.
God bless ye, man, andmay I forgive myself, but I must go.
Mr.
Starbuck, look at thebinnacle watch, and in three minutes from this present instant warnoff all strangers: then brace forward again, and let the ship sailas before.
"Hurriedly turning, with averted face, he descended into his cabin,leaving the strange captain transfixed at this unconditional andutter rejection of his so earnest suit.
But starting from hisenchantment, Gardiner silently hurried to the side; more fell thanstepped into his boat, and returned to his ship.
Soon the two ships diverged their wakes; and long as the strangevessel was in view, she was seen to yaw hither and thither at everydark spot, however small, on the sea.
This way and that her yardswere swung round; starboard and larboard, she continued to tack;now she beat against a head sea; and again it pushed her before it;while all the while, her masts and yards were thickly clustered withmen, as three tall cherry trees, when the boys are cherrying amongthe boughs.
But by her still halting course and winding, woeful way, you plainlysaw that this ship that so wept with spray, still remained withoutcomfort.
She was Rachel, weeping for her children, because they werenot.
The Cabin.
(AHAB MOVING TO GO ON DECK; PIP CATCHES HIM BY THE HAND TO FOLLOW.
)Lad, lad, I tell thee thou must not follow Ahab now.
The hour iscoming when Ahab would not scare thee from him, yet would not havethee by him.
There is that in thee, poor lad, which I feel toocuring to my malady.
Like cures like; and for this hunt, my maladybecomes my most desired health.
Do thou abide below here, where theyshall serve thee, as if thou wert the captain.
Aye, lad, thou shaltsit here in my own screwed chair; another screw to it, thou must be.
""No, no, no! ye have not a whole body, sir; do ye but use poor me foryour one lost leg; only tread upon me, sir; I ask no more, so Iremain a part of ye.
""Oh! spite of million villains, this makes me a bigot in the fadelessfidelity of man!--and a black! and crazy!--but methinkslike-cures-like applies to him too; he grows so sane again.
""They tell me, sir, that Stubb did once desert poor little Pip, whosedrowned bones now show white, for all the blackness of his livingskin.
But I will never desert ye, sir, as Stubb did him.
Sir, Imust go with ye.
""If thou speakest thus to me much more, Ahab's purpose keels up inhim.
I tell thee no; it cannot be.
""Oh good master, master, master!"Weep so, and I will murder thee! have a care, for Ahab too is mad.
Listen, and thou wilt often hear my ivory foot upon the deck, andstill know that I am there.
And now I quit thee.
Thy hand!--Met!True art thou, lad, as the circumference to its centre.
So: God forever bless thee; and if it come to that,--God for ever save thee, letwhat will befall.
"(AHAB GOES; PIP STEPS ONE STEP FORWARD.
)"Here he this instant stood; I stand in his air,--but I'm alone.
Now were even poor Pip here I could endure it, but he's missing.
Pip! Pip! Ding, dong, ding! Who's seen Pip? He must be up here;let's try the door.
What? neither lock, nor bolt, nor bar; and yetthere's no opening it.
It must be the spell; he told me to stayhere: Aye, and told me this screwed chair was mine.
Here, then, I'llseat me, against the transom, in the ship's full middle, all her keeland her three masts before me.
Here, our old sailors say, in theirblack seventy-fours great admirals sometimes sit at table, and lordit over rows of captains and lieutenants.
Ha! what's this? epaulets!epaulets! the epaulets all come crowding! Pass round the decanters;glad to see ye; fill up, monsieurs! What an odd feeling, now, when ablack boy's host to white men with gold lace upon theircoats!--Monsieurs, have ye seen one Pip?--a little negro lad, fivefeet high, hang-dog look, and cowardly! Jumped from a whale-boatonce;--seen him? No! Well then, fill up again, captains, and let'sdrink shame upon all cowards! I name no names.
Shame upon them!Put one foot upon the table.
Shame upon all cowards.
--Hist! abovethere, I hear ivory--Oh, master! master! I am indeed down-heartedwhen you walk over me.
But here I'll stay, though this sternstrikes rocks; and they bulge through; and oysters come to join me.
"The Hat.
And now that at the proper time and place, after so long and wide apreliminary cruise, Ahab,--all other whaling waters swept--seemed tohave chased his foe into an ocean-fold, to slay him the more securelythere; now, that he found himself hard by the very latitude andlongitude where his tormenting wound had been inflicted; now that avessel had been spoken which on the very day preceding had actuallyencountered Moby Dick;--and now that all his successive meetings withvarious ships contrastingly concurred to show the demoniacindifference with which the white whale tore his hunters, whethersinning or sinned against; now it was that there lurked a somethingin the old man's eyes, which it was hardly sufferable for feeblesouls to see.
As the unsetting polar star, which through thelivelong, arctic, six months' night sustains its piercing, steady,central gaze; so Ahab's purpose now fixedly gleamed down upon theconstant midnight of the gloomy crew.
It domineered above them so,that all their bodings, doubts, misgivings, fears, were fain to hidebeneath their souls, and not sprout forth a single spear or leaf.
In this foreshadowing interval too, all humor, forced or natural,vanished.
Stubb no more strove to raise a smile; Starbuck no morestrove to check one.
Alike, joy and sorrow, hope and fear, seemedground to finest dust, and powdered, for the time, in the clampedmortar of Ahab's iron soul.
Like machines, they dumbly moved aboutthe deck, ever conscious that the old man's despot eye was on them.
But did you deeply scan him in his more secret confidential hours;when he thought no glance but one was on him; then you would haveseen that even as Ahab's eyes so awed the crew's, the inscrutableParsee's glance awed his; or somehow, at least, in some wild way, attimes affected it.
Such an added, gliding strangeness began toinvest the thin Fedallah now; such ceaseless shudderings shook him;that the men looked dubious at him; half uncertain, as it seemed,whether indeed he were a mortal substance, or else a tremulous shadowcast upon the deck by some unseen being's body.
And that shadow wasalways hovering there.
For not by night, even, had Fedallah evercertainly been known to slumber, or go below.
He would stand stillfor hours: but never sat or leaned; his wan but wondrous eyes didplainly say--We two watchmen never rest.
Nor, at any time, by night or day could the mariners now step uponthe deck, unless Ahab was before them; either standing in hispivot-hole, or exactly pacing the planks between two undeviatinglimits,--the main-mast and the mizen; or else they saw him standingin the cabin-scuttle,--his living foot advanced upon the deck, as ifto step; his hat slouched heavily over his eyes; so that howevermotionless he stood, however the days and nights were added on, thathe had not swung in his hammock; yet hidden beneath that slouchinghat, they could never tell unerringly whether, for all this, his eyeswere really closed at times; or whether he was still intentlyscanning them; no matter, though he stood so in the scuttle for awhole hour on the stretch, and the unheeded night-damp gathered inbeads of dew upon that stone-carved coat and hat.
The clothes thatthe night had wet, the next day's sunshine dried upon him; and so,day after day, and night after night; he went no more beneath theplanks; whatever he wanted from the cabin that thing he sent for.
He ate in the same open air; that is, his two only meals,--breakfastand dinner: supper he never touched; nor reaped his beard; whichdarkly grew all gnarled, as unearthed roots of trees blown over,which still grow idly on at naked base, though perished in the upperverdure.
But though his whole life was now become one watch on deck;and though the Parsee's mystic watch was without intermission as hisown; yet these two never seemed to speak--one man to theother--unless at long intervals some passing unmomentous matter madeit necessary.
Though such a potent spell seemed secretly to join thetwain; openly, and to the awe-struck crew, they seemed pole-likeasunder.
If by day they chanced to speak one word; by night, dumbmen were both, so far as concerned the slightest verbal interchange.
At times, for longest hours, without a single hail, they stood farparted in the starlight; Ahab in his scuttle, the Parsee by themainmast; but still fixedly gazing upon each other; as if in theParsee Ahab saw his forethrown shadow, in Ahab the Parsee hisabandoned substance.
And yet, somehow, did Ahab--in his own proper self, as daily, hourly,and every instant, commandingly revealed to his subordinates,--Ahabseemed an independent lord; the Parsee but his slave.
Still againboth seemed yoked together, and an unseen tyrant driving them; thelean shade siding the solid rib.
For be this Parsee what he may, allrib and keel was solid Ahab.
At the first faintest glimmering of the dawn, his iron voice washeard from aft,--"Man the mast-heads!"--and all through the day,till after sunset and after twilight, the same voice every hour, atthe striking of the helmsman's bell, was heard--"What d'yesee?--sharp! sharp!"But when three or four days had slided by, after meeting thechildren-seeking Rachel; and no spout had yet been seen; themonomaniac old man seemed distrustful of his crew's fidelity; atleast, of nearly all except the Pagan harpooneers; he seemed todoubt, even, whether Stubb and Flask might not willingly overlook thesight he sought.
But if these suspicions were really his, hesagaciously refrained from verbally expressing them, however hisactions might seem to hint them.
"I will have the first sight of the whale myself,"--he said.
"Aye!Ahab must have the doubloon! and with his own hands he rigged a nestof basketed bowlines; and sending a hand aloft, with a single sheavedblock, to secure to the main-mast head, he received the two ends ofthe downward-reeved rope; and attaching one to his basket prepared apin for the other end, in order to fasten it at the rail.
This done,with that end yet in his hand and standing beside the pin, he lookedround upon his crew, sweeping from one to the other; pausing hisglance long upon Daggoo, Queequeg, Tashtego; but shunning Fedallah;and then settling his firm relying eye upon the chief mate,said,--"Take the rope, sir--I give it into thy hands, Starbuck.
"Then arranging his person in the basket, he gave the word for them tohoist him to his perch, Starbuck being the one who secured the ropeat last; and afterwards stood near it.
And thus, with one handclinging round the royal mast, Ahab gazed abroad upon the sea formiles and miles,--ahead, astern, this side, and that,--within thewide expanded circle commanded at so great a height.
When in working with his hands at some lofty almost isolated place inthe rigging, which chances to afford no foothold, the sailor at seais hoisted up to that spot, and sustained there by the rope; underthese circumstances, its fastened end on deck is always given instrict charge to some one man who has the special watch of it.
Because in such a wilderness of running rigging, whose variousdifferent relations aloft cannot always be infallibly discerned bywhat is seen of them at the deck; and when the deck-ends of theseropes are being every few minutes cast down from the fastenings, itwould be but a natural fatality, if, unprovided with a constantwatchman, the hoisted sailor should by some carelessness of the crewbe cast adrift and fall all swooping to the sea.
So Ahab'sproceedings in this matter were not unusual; the only strange thingabout them seemed to be, that Starbuck, almost the one only man whohad ever ventured to oppose him with anything in the slightest degreeapproaching to decision--one of those too, whose faithfulness on thelook-out he had seemed to doubt somewhat;--it was strange, that thiswas the very man he should select for his watchman; freely giving hiswhole life into such an otherwise distrusted person's hands.
Now, the first time Ahab was perched aloft; ere he had been there tenminutes; one of those red-billed savage sea-hawks which so often flyincommodiously close round the manned mast-heads of whalemen in theselatitudes; one of these birds came wheeling and screaming round hishead in a maze of untrackably swift circlings.
Then it darted athousand feet straight up into the air; then spiralized downwards,and went eddying again round his head.
But with his gaze fixed upon the dim and distant horizon, Ahab seemednot to mark this wild bird; nor, indeed, would any one else havemarked it much, it being no uncommon circumstance; only now almostthe least heedful eye seemed to see some sort of cunning meaning inalmost every sight.
"Your hat, your hat, sir!" suddenly cried the Sicilian seaman, whobeing posted at the mizen-mast-head, stood directly behind Ahab,though somewhat lower than his level, and with a deep gulf of airdividing them.
But already the sable wing was before the old man's eyes; the longhooked bill at his head: with a scream, the black hawk darted awaywith his prize.
An eagle flew thrice round Tarquin's head, removing his cap toreplace it, and thereupon Tanaquil, his wife, declared that Tarquinwould be king of Rome.
But only by the replacing of the cap was thatomen accounted good.
Ahab's hat was never restored; the wild hawkflew on and on with it; far in advance of the prow: and at lastdisappeared; while from the point of that disappearance, a minuteblack spot was dimly discerned, falling from that vast height intothe sea.
The Pequod Meets The Delight.
The intense Pequod sailed on; the rolling waves and days went by; thelife-buoy-coffin still lightly swung; and another ship, mostmiserably misnamed the Delight, was descried.
As she drew nigh, alleyes were fixed upon her broad beams, called shears, which, in somewhaling-ships, cross the quarter-deck at the height of eight or ninefeet; serving to carry the spare, unrigged, or disabled boats.
Upon the stranger's shears were beheld the shattered, white ribs, andsome few splintered planks, of what had once been a whale-boat; butyou now saw through this wreck, as plainly as you see through thepeeled, half-unhinged, and bleaching skeleton of a horse.
"Hast seen the White Whale?""Look!" replied the hollow-cheeked captain from his taffrail; andwith his trumpet he pointed to the wreck.
"Hast killed him?""The harpoon is not yet forged that ever will do that," answered theother, sadly glancing upon a rounded hammock on the deck, whosegathered sides some noiseless sailors were busy in sewing together.
"Not forged!" and snatching Perth's levelled iron from the crotch,Ahab held it out, exclaiming--"Look ye, Nantucketer; here in thishand I hold his death! Tempered in blood, and tempered by lightningare these barbs; and I swear to temper them triply in that hot placebehind the fin, where the White Whale most feels his accursed life!""Then God keep thee, old man--see'st thou that"--pointing to thehammock--"I bury but one of five stout men, who were alive onlyyesterday; but were dead ere night.
Only THAT one I bury; the restwere buried before they died; you sail upon their tomb.
" Thenturning to his crew--"Are ye ready there? place the plank then on therail, and lift the body; so, then--Oh! God"--advancing towards thehammock with uplifted hands--"may the resurrection and the life--""Brace forward! Up helm!" cried Ahab like lightning to his men.
But the suddenly started Pequod was not quick enough to escape thesound of the splash that the corpse soon made as it struck the sea;not so quick, indeed, but that some of the flying bubbles might havesprinkled her hull with their ghostly baptism.
As Ahab now glided from the dejected Delight, the strange life-buoyhanging at the Pequod's stern came into conspicuous relief.
"Ha! yonder! look yonder, men!" cried a foreboding voice in her wake.
"In vain, oh, ye strangers, ye fly our sad burial; ye but turn usyour taffrail to show us your coffin!"The Symphony.
It was a clear steel-blue day.
The firmaments of air and sea werehardly separable in that all-pervading azure; only, the pensive airwas transparently pure and soft, with a woman's look, and the robustand man-like sea heaved with long, strong, lingering swells, asSamson's chest in his sleep.
Hither, and thither, on high, glided the snow-white wings of small,unspeckled birds; these were the gentle thoughts of the feminine air;but to and fro in the deeps, far down in the bottomless blue, rushedmighty leviathans, sword-fish, and sharks; and these were the strong,troubled, murderous thinkings of the masculine sea.
But though thus contrasting within, the contrast was only in shadesand shadows without; those two seemed one; it was only the sex, as itwere, that distinguished them.
Aloft, like a royal czar and king, the sun seemed giving this gentleair to this bold and rolling sea; even as bride to groom.
And at thegirdling line of the horizon, a soft and tremulous motion--most seenhere at the Equator--denoted the fond, throbbing trust, the lovingalarms, with which the poor bride gave her bosom away.
Tied up and twisted; gnarled and knotted with wrinkles; haggardlyfirm and unyielding; his eyes glowing like coals, that still glow inthe ashes of ruin; untottering Ahab stood forth in the clearness ofthe morn; lifting his splintered helmet of a brow to the fair girl'sforehead of heaven.
Oh, immortal infancy, and innocency of the azure! Invisible wingedcreatures that frolic all round us! Sweet childhood of air and sky!how oblivious were ye of old Ahab's close-coiled woe! But so have Iseen little Miriam and Martha, laughing-eyed elves, heedlessly gambolaround their old sire; sporting with the circle of singed locks whichgrew on the marge of that burnt-out crater of his brain.
Slowly crossing the deck from the scuttle, Ahab leaned over the sideand watched how his shadow in the water sank and sank to his gaze,the more and the more that he strove to pierce the profundity.
Butthe lovely aromas in that enchanted air did at last seem to dispel,for a moment, the cankerous thing in his soul.
That glad, happy air,that winsome sky, did at last stroke and caress him; the step-motherworld, so long cruel--forbidding--now threw affectionate arms roundhis stubborn neck, and did seem to joyously sob over him, as if overone, that however wilful and erring, she could yet find it in herheart to save and to bless.
From beneath his slouched hat Ahabdropped a tear into the sea; nor did all the Pacific contain suchwealth as that one wee drop.
Starbuck saw the old man; saw him, how he heavily leaned over theside; and he seemed to hear in his own true heart the measurelesssobbing that stole out of the centre of the serenity around.
Carefulnot to touch him, or be noticed by him, he yet drew near to him, andstood there.
Ahab turned.
"Starbuck!""Sir.
""Oh, Starbuck! it is a mild, mild wind, and a mild looking sky.
Onsuch a day--very much such a sweetness as this--I struck my firstwhale--a boy-harpooneer of eighteen! Forty--forty--forty yearsago!--ago! Forty years of continual whaling! forty years ofprivation, and peril, and storm-time! forty years on the pitilesssea! for forty years has Ahab forsaken the peaceful land, for fortyyears to make war on the horrors of the deep! Aye and yes, Starbuck,out of those forty years I have not spent three ashore.
When I thinkof this life I have led; the desolation of solitude it has been; themasoned, walled-town of a Captain's exclusiveness, which admits butsmall entrance to any sympathy from the green country without--oh,weariness! heaviness! Guinea-coast slavery of solitarycommand!--when I think of all this; only half-suspected, not sokeenly known to me before--and how for forty years I have fed upondry salted fare--fit emblem of the dry nourishment of my soil!--whenthe poorest landsman has had fresh fruit to his daily hand, andbroken the world's fresh bread to my mouldy crusts--away, wholeoceans away, from that young girl-wife I wedded past fifty, andsailed for Cape Horn the next day, leaving but one dent in mymarriage pillow--wife? wife?--rather a widow with her husband alive!Aye, I widowed that poor girl when I married her, Starbuck; andthen, the madness, the frenzy, the boiling blood and the smokingbrow, with which, for a thousand lowerings old Ahab has furiously,foamingly chased his prey--more a demon than a man!--aye, aye! what aforty years' fool--fool--old fool, has old Ahab been! Why thisstrife of the chase? why weary, and palsy the arm at the oar, and theiron, and the lance? how the richer or better is Ahab now? Behold.
Oh, Starbuck! is it not hard, that with this weary load I bear, onepoor leg should have been snatched from under me? Here, brush thisold hair aside; it blinds me, that I seem to weep.
Locks so grey didnever grow but from out some ashes! But do I look very old, so very,very old, Starbuck? I feel deadly faint, bowed, and humped, asthough I were Adam, staggering beneath the piled centuries sinceParadise.
God! God! God!--crack my heart!--stave mybrain!--mockery! mockery! bitter, biting mockery of grey hairs, haveI lived enough joy to wear ye; and seem and feel thus intolerablyold? Close! stand close to me, Starbuck; let me look into a humaneye; it is better than to gaze into sea or sky; better than to gazeupon God.
By the green land; by the bright hearth-stone! this is themagic glass, man; I see my wife and my child in thine eye.
No, no;stay on board, on board!--lower not when I do; when branded Ahabgives chase to Moby Dick.
That hazard shall not be thine.
No, no!not with the far away home I see in that eye!""Oh, my Captain! my Captain! noble soul! grand old heart, after all!why should any one give chase to that hated fish! Away with me! letus fly these deadly waters! let us home! Wife and child, too, areStarbuck's--wife and child of his brotherly, sisterly, play-fellowyouth; even as thine, sir, are the wife and child of thy loving,longing, paternal old age! Away! let us away!--this instant let mealter the course! How cheerily, how hilariously, O my Captain, wouldwe bowl on our way to see old Nantucket again! I think, sir, theyhave some such mild blue days, even as this, in Nantucket.
""They have, they have.
I have seen them--some summer days in themorning.
About this time--yes, it is his noon nap now--the boyvivaciously wakes; sits up in bed; and his mother tells him of me, ofcannibal old me; how I am abroad upon the deep, but will yet comeback to dance him again.
""'Tis my Mary, my Mary herself! She promised that my boy, everymorning, should be carried to the hill to catch the first glimpse ofhis father's sail! Yes, yes! no more! it is done! we head forNantucket! Come, my Captain, study out the course, and let us away!See, see! the boy's face from the window! the boy's hand on thehill!"But Ahab's glance was averted; like a blighted fruit tree he shook,and cast his last, cindered apple to the soil.
"What is it, what nameless, inscrutable, unearthly thing is it; whatcozening, hidden lord and master, and cruel, remorseless emperorcommands me; that against all natural lovings and longings, I so keeppushing, and crowding, and jamming myself on all the time; recklesslymaking me ready to do what in my own proper, natural heart, I durstnot so much as dare? Is Ahab, Ahab? Is it I, God, or who, thatlifts this arm? But if the great sun move not of himself; but is as anerrand-boy in heaven; nor one single star can revolve, but by someinvisible power; how then can this one small heart beat; this onesmall brain think thoughts; unless God does that beating, does thatthinking, does that living, and not I.
By heaven, man, we are turnedround and round in this world, like yonder windlass, and Fate is thehandspike.
And all the time, lo! that smiling sky, and thisunsounded sea! Look! see yon Albicore! who put it into him to chaseand fang that flying-fish? Where do murderers go, man! Who's todoom, when the judge himself is dragged to the bar? But it is amild, mild wind, and a mild looking sky; and the air smells now, asif it blew from a far-away meadow; they have been making haysomewhere under the slopes of the Andes, Starbuck, and the mowers aresleeping among the new-mown hay.
Sleeping? Aye, toil we how we may,we all sleep at last on the field.
Sleep? Aye, and rust amidgreenness; as last year's scythes flung down, and left in the half-cutswaths--Starbuck!"But blanched to a corpse's hue with despair, the Mate had stolenaway.
Ahab crossed the deck to gaze over on the other side; but started attwo reflected, fixed eyes in the water there.
Fedallah wasmotionlessly leaning over the same rail.
The Chase--First Day.
That night, in the mid-watch, when the old man--as his wont atintervals--stepped forth from the scuttle in which he leaned, andwent to his pivot-hole, he suddenly thrust out his face fiercely,snuffing up the sea air as a sagacious ship's dog will, in drawingnigh to some barbarous isle.
He declared that a whale must be near.
Soon that peculiar odor, sometimes to a great distance given forth bythe living sperm whale, was palpable to all the watch; nor was anymariner surprised when, after inspecting the compass, and then thedog-vane, and then ascertaining the precise bearing of the odor asnearly as possible, Ahab rapidly ordered the ship's course to beslightly altered, and the sail to be shortened.
The acute policy dictating these movements was sufficientlyvindicated at daybreak, by the sight of a long sleek on the seadirectly and lengthwise ahead, smooth as oil, and resembling in thepleated watery wrinkles bordering it, the polished metallic-likemarks of some swift tide-rip, at the mouth of a deep, rapid stream.
"Man the mast-heads! Call all hands!"Thundering with the butts of three clubbed handspikes on theforecastle deck, Daggoo roused the sleepers with such judgment clapsthat they seemed to exhale from the scuttle, so instantaneously didthey appear with their clothes in their hands.
"What d'ye see?" cried Ahab, flattening his face to the sky.
"Nothing, nothing sir!" was the sound hailing down in reply.
"T'gallant sails!--stunsails! alow and aloft, and on both sides!"All sail being set, he now cast loose the life-line, reserved forswaying him to the main royal-mast head; and in a few moments theywere hoisting him thither, when, while but two thirds of the wayaloft, and while peering ahead through the horizontal vacancy betweenthe main-top-sail and top-gallant-sail, he raised a gull-like cry inthe air.
"There she blows!--there she blows! A hump like asnow-hill! It is Moby Dick!"Fired by the cry which seemed simultaneously taken up by the threelook-outs, the men on deck rushed to the rigging to behold the famouswhale they had so long been pursuing.
Ahab had now gained his finalperch, some feet above the other look-outs, Tashtego standing justbeneath him on the cap of the top-gallant-mast, so that the Indian'shead was almost on a level with Ahab's heel.
From this height thewhale was now seen some mile or so ahead, at every roll of the searevealing his high sparkling hump, and regularly jetting his silentspout into the air.
To the credulous mariners it seemed the samesilent spout they had so long ago beheld in the moonlit Atlantic andIndian Oceans.
"And did none of ye see it before?" cried Ahab, hailing the perchedmen all around him.
"I saw him almost that same instant, sir, that Captain Ahab did, andI cried out," said Tashtego.
"Not the same instant; not the same--no, the doubloon is mine, Fatereserved the doubloon for me.
I only; none of ye could have raisedthe White Whale first.
There she blows!--there she blows!--thereshe blows! There again!--there again!" he cried, in long-drawn,lingering, methodic tones, attuned to the gradual prolongings of thewhale's visible jets.
"He's going to sound! In stunsails! Downtop-gallant-sails! Stand by three boats.
Mr.
Starbuck, remember,stay on board, and keep the ship.
Helm there! Luff, luff a point!So; steady, man, steady! There go flukes! No, no; only black water!All ready the boats there? Stand by, stand by! Lower me, Mr.
Starbuck; lower, lower,--quick, quicker!" and he slid through the airto the deck.
"He is heading straight to leeward, sir," cried Stubb, "right awayfrom us; cannot have seen the ship yet.
""Be dumb, man! Stand by the braces! Hard down the helm!--brace up!Shiver her!--shiver her!--So; well that! Boats, boats!"Soon all the boats but Starbuck's were dropped; all the boat-sailsset--all the paddles plying; with rippling swiftness, shooting toleeward; and Ahab heading the onset.
A pale, death-glimmer lit upFedallah's sunken eyes; a hideous motion gnawed his mouth.
Like noiseless nautilus shells, their light prows sped through thesea; but only slowly they neared the foe.
As they neared him, theocean grew still more smooth; seemed drawing a carpet over its waves;seemed a noon-meadow, so serenely it spread.
At length thebreathless hunter came so nigh his seemingly unsuspecting prey, that hisentire dazzling hump was distinctly visible, sliding along the sea asif an isolated thing, and continually set in a revolving ring offinest, fleecy, greenish foam.
He saw the vast, involved wrinkles ofthe slightly projecting head beyond.
Before it, far out on the softTurkish-rugged waters, went the glistening white shadow from hisbroad, milky forehead, a musical rippling playfully accompanying theshade; and behind, the blue waters interchangeably flowed over intothe moving valley of his steady wake; and on either hand brightbubbles arose and danced by his side.
But these were broken again bythe light toes of hundreds of gay fowl softly feathering the sea,alternate with their fitful flight; and like to some flag-staffrising from the painted hull of an argosy, the tall but shatteredpole of a recent lance projected from the white whale's back; and atintervals one of the cloud of soft-toed fowls hovering, and to andfro skimming like a canopy over the fish, silently perched and rockedon this pole, the long tail feathers streaming like pennons.
A gentle joyousness--a mighty mildness of repose in swiftness,invested the gliding whale.
Not the white bull Jupiter swimming awaywith ravished Europa clinging to his graceful horns; his lovely,leering eyes sideways intent upon the maid; with smooth bewitchingfleetness, rippling straight for the nuptial bower in Crete; notJove, not that great majesty Supreme! did surpass the glorified WhiteWhale as he so divinely swam.
On each soft side--coincident with the parted swell, that but onceleaving him, then flowed so wide away--on each bright side, the whaleshed off enticings.
No wonder there had been some among the hunterswho namelessly transported and allured by all this serenity, hadventured to assail it; but had fatally found that quietude but thevesture of tornadoes.
Yet calm, enticing calm, oh, whale! thouglidest on, to all who for the first time eye thee, no matter howmany in that same way thou may'st have bejuggled and destroyedbefore.
And thus, through the serene tranquillities of the tropical sea,among waves whose hand-clappings were suspended by exceeding rapture,Moby Dick moved on, still withholding from sight the full terrors ofhis submerged trunk, entirely hiding the wrenched hideousness of hisjaw.
But soon the fore part of him slowly rose from the water; foran instant his whole marbleized body formed a high arch, likeVirginia's Natural Bridge, and warningly waving his bannered flukesin the air, the grand god revealed himself, sounded, and went out ofsight.
Hoveringly halting, and dipping on the wing, the whitesea-fowls longingly lingered over the agitated pool that he left.
With oars apeak, and paddles down, the sheets of their sails adrift,the three boats now stilly floated, awaiting Moby Dick'sreappearance.
"An hour," said Ahab, standing rooted in his boat's stern; and hegazed beyond the whale's place, towards the dim blue spaces and widewooing vacancies to leeward.
It was only an instant; for again hiseyes seemed whirling round in his head as he swept the watery circle.
The breeze now freshened; the sea began to swell.
"The birds!--the birds!" cried Tashtego.
In long Indian file, as when herons take wing, the white birds werenow all flying towards Ahab's boat; and when within a few yards beganfluttering over the water there, wheeling round and round, withjoyous, expectant cries.
Their vision was keener than man's; Ahabcould discover no sign in the sea.
But suddenly as he peered downand down into its depths, he profoundly saw a white living spot nobigger than a white weasel, with wonderful celerity uprising, andmagnifying as it rose, till it turned, and then there were plainlyrevealed two long crooked rows of white, glistening teeth, floatingup from the undiscoverable bottom.
It was Moby Dick's open mouth andscrolled jaw; his vast, shadowed bulk still half blending with theblue of the sea.
The glittering mouth yawned beneath the boat likean open-doored marble tomb; and giving one sidelong sweep with hissteering oar, Ahab whirled the craft aside from this tremendousapparition.
Then, calling upon Fedallah to change places with him,went forward to the bows, and seizing Perth's harpoon, commanded hiscrew to grasp their oars and stand by to stern.
Now, by reason of this timely spinning round the boat upon its axis,its bow, by anticipation, was made to face the whale's head while yetunder water.
But as if perceiving this stratagem, Moby Dick, withthat malicious intelligence ascribed to him, sidelingly transplantedhimself, as it were, in an instant, shooting his pleated headlengthwise beneath the boat.
Through and through; through every plank and each rib, it thrilledfor an instant, the whale obliquely lying on his back, in the mannerof a biting shark, slowly and feelingly taking its bows full withinhis mouth, so that the long, narrow, scrolled lower jaw curled highup into the open air, and one of the teeth caught in a row-lock.
Thebluish pearl-white of the inside of the jaw was within six inches ofAhab's head, and reached higher than that.
In this attitude theWhite Whale now shook the slight cedar as a mildly cruel cat hermouse.
With unastonished eyes Fedallah gazed, and crossed his arms;but the tiger-yellow crew were tumbling over each other's heads togain the uttermost stern.
And now, while both elastic gunwales were springing in and out, asthe whale dallied with the doomed craft in this devilish way; andfrom his body being submerged beneath the boat, he could not bedarted at from the bows, for the bows were almost inside of him, asit were; and while the other boats involuntarily paused, as before aquick crisis impossible to withstand, then it was that monomaniacAhab, furious with this tantalizing vicinity of his foe, which placedhim all alive and helpless in the very jaws he hated; frenzied withall this, he seized the long bone with his naked hands, and wildlystrove to wrench it from its gripe.
As now he thus vainly strove,the jaw slipped from him; the frail gunwales bent in, collapsed, andsnapped, as both jaws, like an enormous shears, sliding further aft,bit the craft completely in twain, and locked themselves fast againin the sea, midway between the two floating wrecks.
These floatedaside, the broken ends drooping, the crew at the stern-wreck clingingto the gunwales, and striving to hold fast to the oars to lash themacross.
At that preluding moment, ere the boat was yet snapped, Ahab, thefirst to perceive the whale's intent, by the crafty upraising of hishead, a movement that loosed his hold for the time; at that momenthis hand had made one final effort to push the boat out of the bite.
But only slipping further into the whale's mouth, and tilting oversideways as it slipped, the boat had shaken off his hold on the jaw;spilled him out of it, as he leaned to the push; and so he fellflat-faced upon the sea.
Ripplingly withdrawing from his prey, Moby Dick now lay at a littledistance, vertically thrusting his oblong white head up and down inthe billows; and at the same time slowly revolving his whole spindledbody; so that when his vast wrinkled forehead rose--some twenty ormore feet out of the water--the now rising swells, with all theirconfluent waves, dazzlingly broke against it; vindictively tossingtheir shivered spray still higher into the air.
* So, in a gale, thebut half baffled Channel billows only recoil from the base of theEddystone, triumphantly to overleap its summit with their scud.
*This motion is peculiar to the sperm whale.
It receives itsdesignation (pitchpoling) from its being likened to that preliminaryup-and-down poise of the whale-lance, in the exercise calledpitchpoling, previously described.
By this motion the whale mustbest and most comprehensively view whatever objects may be encirclinghim.
But soon resuming his horizontal attitude, Moby Dick swam swiftlyround and round the wrecked crew; sideways churning the water in hisvengeful wake, as if lashing himself up to still another and moredeadly assault.
The sight of the splintered boat seemed to maddenhim, as the blood of grapes and mulberries cast before Antiochus'selephants in the book of Maccabees.
Meanwhile Ahab half smothered inthe foam of the whale's insolent tail, and too much of a cripple toswim,--though he could still keep afloat, even in the heart of such awhirlpool as that; helpless Ahab's head was seen, like a tossedbubble which the least chance shock might burst.
From the boat'sfragmentary stern, Fedallah incuriously and mildly eyed him; theclinging crew, at the other drifting end, could not succor him; morethan enough was it for them to look to themselves.
For sorevolvingly appalling was the White Whale's aspect, and soplanetarily swift the ever-contracting circles he made, that heseemed horizontally swooping upon them.
And though the other boats,unharmed, still hovered hard by; still they dared not pull into theeddy to strike, lest that should be the signal for the instantdestruction of the jeopardized castaways, Ahab and all; nor in thatcase could they themselves hope to escape.
With straining eyes,then, they remained on the outer edge of the direful zone, whosecentre had now become the old man's head.
Meantime, from the beginning all this had been descried from theship's mast heads; and squaring her yards, she had borne down uponthe scene; and was now so nigh, that Ahab in the water hailedher!--"Sail on the"--but that moment a breaking sea dashed on himfrom Moby Dick, and whelmed him for the time.
But struggling out ofit again, and chancing to rise on a towering crest, heshouted,--"Sail on the whale!--Drive him off!"The Pequod's prows were pointed; and breaking up the charmed circle,she effectually parted the white whale from his victim.
As hesullenly swam off, the boats flew to the rescue.
Dragged into Stubb's boat with blood-shot, blinded eyes, the whitebrine caking in his wrinkles; the long tension of Ahab's bodilystrength did crack, and helplessly he yielded to his body's doom: fora time, lying all crushed in the bottom of Stubb's boat, like onetrodden under foot of herds of elephants.
Far inland, nameless wailscame from him, as desolate sounds from out ravines.
But this intensity of his physical prostration did but so much themore abbreviate it.
In an instant's compass, great hearts sometimescondense to one deep pang, the sum total of those shallow painskindly diffused through feebler men's whole lives.
And so, suchhearts, though summary in each one suffering; still, if the godsdecree it, in their life-time aggregate a whole age of woe, whollymade up of instantaneous intensities; for even in their pointlesscentres, those noble natures contain the entire circumferences ofinferior souls.
"The harpoon," said Ahab, half way rising, and draggingly leaning onone bended arm--"is it safe?""Aye, sir, for it was not darted; this is it," said Stubb, showingit.
"Lay it before me;--any missing men?""One, two, three, four, five;--there were five oars, sir, and hereare five men.
""That's good.
--Help me, man; I wish to stand.
So, so, I see him!there! there! going to leeward still; what a leaping spout!--Handsoff from me! The eternal sap runs up in Ahab's bones again! Set thesail; out oars; the helm!"It is often the case that when a boat is stove, its crew, beingpicked up by another boat, help to work that second boat; and thechase is thus continued with what is called double-banked oars.
Itwas thus now.
But the added power of the boat did not equal theadded power of the whale, for he seemed to have treble-banked hisevery fin; swimming with a velocity which plainly showed, that ifnow, under these circumstances, pushed on, the chase would prove anindefinitely prolonged, if not a hopeless one; nor could any crewendure for so long a period, such an unintermitted, intense strainingat the oar; a thing barely tolerable only in some one briefvicissitude.
The ship itself, then, as it sometimes happens, offeredthe most promising intermediate means of overtaking the chase.
Accordingly, the boats now made for her, and were soon swayed up totheir cranes--the two parts of the wrecked boat having beenpreviously secured by her--and then hoisting everything to her side,and stacking her canvas high up, and sideways outstretching it withstun-sails, like the double-jointed wings of an albatross; the Pequodbore down in the leeward wake of Moby-Dick.
At the well known,methodic intervals, the whale's glittering spout was regularlyannounced from the manned mast-heads; and when he would be reportedas just gone down, Ahab would take the time, and then pacing thedeck, binnacle-watch in hand, so soon as the last second of theallotted hour expired, his voice was heard.
--"Whose is the doubloonnow? D'ye see him?" and if the reply was, No, sir! straightway hecommanded them to lift him to his perch.
In this way the day woreon; Ahab, now aloft and motionless; anon, unrestingly pacing theplanks.
As he was thus walking, uttering no sound, except to hail the menaloft, or to bid them hoist a sail still higher, or to spread one toa still greater breadth--thus to and fro pacing, beneath his slouchedhat, at every turn he passed his own wrecked boat, which had beendropped upon the quarter-deck, and lay there reversed; broken bow toshattered stern.
At last he paused before it; and as in an alreadyover-clouded sky fresh troops of clouds will sometimes sail across,so over the old man's face there now stole some such added gloom asthis.
Stubb saw him pause; and perhaps intending, not vainly, though, toevince his own unabated fortitude, and thus keep up a valiant placein his Captain's mind, he advanced, and eyeing the wreckexclaimed--"The thistle the ass refused; it pricked his mouth tookeenly, sir; ha! ha!""What soulless thing is this that laughs before a wreck? Man, man!did I not know thee brave as fearless fire (and as mechanical) Icould swear thou wert a poltroon.
Groan nor laugh should be heardbefore a wreck.
""Aye, sir," said Starbuck drawing near, "'tis a solemn sight; anomen, and an ill one.
""Omen? omen?--the dictionary! If the gods think to speak outright toman, they will honourably speak outright; not shake their heads, andgive an old wives' darkling hint.
--Begone! Ye two are the oppositepoles of one thing; Starbuck is Stubb reversed, and Stubb isStarbuck; and ye two are all mankind; and Ahab stands alone among themillions of the peopled earth, nor gods nor men his neighbors! Cold,cold--I shiver!--How now? Aloft there! D'ye see him? Sing out forevery spout, though he spout ten times a second!"The day was nearly done; only the hem of his golden robe wasrustling.
Soon, it was almost dark, but the look-out men stillremained unset.
"Can't see the spout now, sir;--too dark"--cried a voice from theair.
"How heading when last seen?""As before, sir,--straight to leeward.
""Good! he will travel slower now 'tis night.
Down royals andtop-gallant stun-sails, Mr.
Starbuck.
We must not run over himbefore morning; he's making a passage now, and may heave-to a while.
Helm there! keep her full before the wind!--Aloft! come down!--Mr.
Stubb, send a fresh hand to the fore-mast head, and see it mannedtill morning.
"--Then advancing towards the doubloon in themain-mast--"Men, this gold is mine, for I earned it; but I shall letit abide here till the White Whale is dead; and then, whosoever of yefirst raises him, upon the day he shall be killed, this gold is thatman's; and if on that day I shall again raise him, then, ten timesits sum shall be divided among all of ye! Away now!--the deck isthine, sir!"And so saying, he placed himself half way within the scuttle, andslouching his hat, stood there till dawn, except when at intervalsrousing himself to see how the night wore on.
The Chase--Second Day.
At day-break, the three mast-heads were punctually manned afresh.
"D'ye see him?" cried Ahab after allowing a little space for thelight to spread.
"See nothing, sir.
""Turn up all hands and make sail! he travels faster than I thoughtfor;--the top-gallant sails!--aye, they should have been kept on herall night.
But no matter--'tis but resting for the rush.
"Here be it said, that this pertinacious pursuit of one particularwhale, continued through day into night, and through night into day,is a thing by no means unprecedented in the South sea fishery.
Forsuch is the wonderful skill, prescience of experience, and invincibleconfidence acquired by some great natural geniuses among theNantucket commanders; that from the simple observation of a whalewhen last descried, they will, under certain given circumstances,pretty accurately foretell both the direction in which he willcontinue to swim for a time, while out of sight, as well as hisprobable rate of progression during that period.
And, in thesecases, somewhat as a pilot, when about losing sight of a coast, whosegeneral trending he well knows, and which he desires shortly toreturn to again, but at some further point; like as this pilot standsby his compass, and takes the precise bearing of the cape at presentvisible, in order the more certainly to hit aright the remote, unseenheadland, eventually to be visited: so does the fisherman, at hiscompass, with the whale; for after being chased, and diligentlymarked, through several hours of daylight, then, when night obscuresthe fish, the creature's future wake through the darkness is almostas established to the sagacious mind of the hunter, as the pilot'scoast is to him.
So that to this hunter's wondrous skill, theproverbial evanescence of a thing writ in water, a wake, is to alldesired purposes well nigh as reliable as the steadfast land.
And asthe mighty iron Leviathan of the modern railway is so familiarlyknown in its every pace, that, with watches in their hands, men timehis rate as doctors that of a baby's pulse; and lightly say of it,the up train or the down train will reach such or such a spot, atsuch or such an hour; even so, almost, there are occasions when theseNantucketers time that other Leviathan of the deep, according to theobserved humor of his speed; and say to themselves, so many hourshence this whale will have gone two hundred miles, will have aboutreached this or that degree of latitude or longitude.
But to renderthis acuteness at all successful in the end, the wind and the seamust be the whaleman's allies; for of what present avail to thebecalmed or windbound mariner is the skill that assures him he isexactly ninety-three leagues and a quarter from his port? Inferablefrom these statements, are many collateral subtile matters touchingthe chase of whales.
The ship tore on; leaving such a furrow in the sea as when acannon-ball, missent, becomes a plough-share and turns up the levelfield.
"By salt and hemp!" cried Stubb, "but this swift motion of the deckcreeps up one's legs and tingles at the heart.
This ship and I aretwo brave fellows!--Ha, ha! Some one take me up, and launch me,spine-wise, on the sea,--for by live-oaks! my spine's a keel.
Ha,ha! we go the gait that leaves no dust behind!""There she blows--she blows!--she blows!--right ahead!" was now themast-head cry.
"Aye, aye!" cried Stubb, "I knew it--ye can't escape--blow on andsplit your spout, O whale! the mad fiend himself is after ye! blowyour trump--blister your lungs!--Ahab will dam off your blood, as amiller shuts his watergate upon the stream!"And Stubb did but speak out for well nigh all that crew.
Thefrenzies of the chase had by this time worked them bubblingly up,like old wine worked anew.
Whatever pale fears and forebodings someof them might have felt before; these were not only now kept out ofsight through the growing awe of Ahab, but they were broken up, andon all sides routed, as timid prairie hares that scatter before thebounding bison.
The hand of Fate had snatched all their souls; andby the stirring perils of the previous day; the rack of the pastnight's suspense; the fixed, unfearing, blind, reckless way in whichtheir wild craft went plunging towards its flying mark; by all thesethings, their hearts were bowled along.
The wind that made greatbellies of their sails, and rushed the vessel on by arms invisible asirresistible; this seemed the symbol of that unseen agency which soenslaved them to the race.
They were one man, not thirty.
For as the one ship that held themall; though it was put together of all contrasting things--oak, andmaple, and pine wood; iron, and pitch, and hemp--yet all these raninto each other in the one concrete hull, which shot on its way, bothbalanced and directed by the long central keel; even so, all theindividualities of the crew, this man's valor, that man's fear; guiltand guiltiness, all varieties were welded into oneness, and were alldirected to that fatal goal which Ahab their one lord and keel didpoint to.
The rigging lived.
The mast-heads, like the tops of tall palms, wereoutspreadingly tufted with arms and legs.
Clinging to a spar withone hand, some reached forth the other with impatient wavings;others, shading their eyes from the vivid sunlight, sat far out onthe rocking yards; all the spars in full bearing of mortals, readyand ripe for their fate.
Ah! how they still strove through thatinfinite blueness to seek out the thing that might destroy them!"Why sing ye not out for him, if ye see him?" cried Ahab, when, afterthe lapse of some minutes since the first cry, no more had beenheard.
"Sway me up, men; ye have been deceived; not Moby Dick castsone odd jet that way, and then disappears.
"It was even so; in their headlong eagerness, the men had mistakensome other thing for the whale-spout, as the event itself soonproved; for hardly had Ahab reached his perch; hardly was the ropebelayed to its pin on deck, when he struck the key-note to anorchestra, that made the air vibrate as with the combined dischargesof rifles.
The triumphant halloo of thirty buckskin lungs was heard,as--much nearer to the ship than the place of the imaginary jet, lessthan a mile ahead--Moby Dick bodily burst into view! For not by anycalm and indolent spoutings; not by the peaceable gush of that mysticfountain in his head, did the White Whale now reveal his vicinity;but by the far more wondrous phenomenon of breaching.
Rising withhis utmost velocity from the furthest depths, the Sperm Whale thusbooms his entire bulk into the pure element of air, and piling up amountain of dazzling foam, shows his place to the distance of sevenmiles and more.
In those moments, the torn, enraged waves he shakesoff, seem his mane; in some cases, this breaching is his act ofdefiance.
"There she breaches! there she breaches!" was the cry, as in hisimmeasurable bravadoes the White Whale tossed himself salmon-like toHeaven.
So suddenly seen in the blue plain of the sea, and relievedagainst the still bluer margin of the sky, the spray that he raised,for the moment, intolerably glittered and glared like a glacier; andstood there gradually fading and fading away from its first sparklingintensity, to the dim mistiness of an advancing shower in a vale.
"Aye, breach your last to the sun, Moby Dick!" cried Ahab, "thy hourand thy harpoon are at hand!--Down! down all of ye, but one man atthe fore.
The boats!--stand by!"Unmindful of the tedious rope-ladders of the shrouds, the men, likeshooting stars, slid to the deck, by the isolated backstays andhalyards; while Ahab, less dartingly, but still rapidly was droppedfrom his perch.
"Lower away," he cried, so soon as he had reached his boat--a spareone, rigged the afternoon previous.
"Mr.
Starbuck, the ship isthine--keep away from the boats, but keep near them.
Lower, all!"As if to strike a quick terror into them, by this time being thefirst assailant himself, Moby Dick had turned, and was now coming forthe three crews.
Ahab's boat was central; and cheering his men, hetold them he would take the whale head-and-head,--that is, pullstraight up to his forehead,--a not uncommon thing; for when within acertain limit, such a course excludes the coming onset from thewhale's sidelong vision.
But ere that close limit was gained, andwhile yet all three boats were plain as the ship's three masts to hiseye; the White Whale churning himself into furious speed, almost inan instant as it were, rushing among the boats with open jaws, and alashing tail, offered appalling battle on every side; and heedless ofthe irons darted at him from every boat, seemed only intent onannihilating each separate plank of which those boats were made.
Butskilfully manoeuvred, incessantly wheeling like trained chargers inthe field; the boats for a while eluded him; though, at times, but bya plank's breadth; while all the time, Ahab's unearthly slogan toreevery other cry but his to shreds.
But at last in his untraceable evolutions, the White Whale so crossedand recrossed, and in a thousand ways entangled the slack of thethree lines now fast to him, that they foreshortened, and, ofthemselves, warped the devoted boats towards the planted irons inhim; though now for a moment the whale drew aside a little, as if torally for a more tremendous charge.
Seizing that opportunity, Ahabfirst paid out more line: and then was rapidly hauling and jerkingin upon it again--hoping that way to disencumber it of somesnarls--when lo!--a sight more savage than the embattled teeth ofsharks!Caught and twisted--corkscrewed in the mazes of the line, looseharpoons and lances, with all their bristling barbs and points, cameflashing and dripping up to the chocks in the bows of Ahab's boat.
Only one thing could be done.
Seizing the boat-knife, he criticallyreached within--through--and then, without--the rays of steel;dragged in the line beyond, passed it, inboard, to the bowsman, andthen, twice sundering the rope near the chocks--dropped theintercepted fagot of steel into the sea; and was all fast again.
That instant, the White Whale made a sudden rush among the remainingtangles of the other lines; by so doing, irresistibly dragged themore involved boats of Stubb and Flask towards his flukes; dashedthem together like two rolling husks on a surf-beaten beach, andthen, diving down into the sea, disappeared in a boiling maelstrom,in which, for a space, the odorous cedar chips of the wrecks dancedround and round, like the grated nutmeg in a swiftly stirred bowl ofpunch.
While the two crews were yet circling in the waters, reaching outafter the revolving line-tubs, oars, and other floating furniture,while aslope little Flask bobbed up and down like an empty vial,twitching his legs upwards to escape the dreaded jaws of sharks; andStubb was lustily singing out for some one to ladle him up; and whilethe old man's line--now parting--admitted of his pulling into thecreamy pool to rescue whom he could;--in that wild simultaneousnessof a thousand concreted perils,--Ahab's yet unstricken boat seemeddrawn up towards Heaven by invisible wires,--as, arrow-like, shootingperpendicularly from the sea, the White Whale dashed his broadforehead against its bottom, and sent it, turning over and over, intothe air; till it fell again--gunwale downwards--and Ahab and his menstruggled out from under it, like seals from a sea-side cave.
The first uprising momentum of the whale--modifying its direction ashe struck the surface--involuntarily launched him along it, to alittle distance from the centre of the destruction he had made; andwith his back to it, he now lay for a moment slowly feeling with hisflukes from side to side; and whenever a stray oar, bit of plank, theleast chip or crumb of the boats touched his skin, his tail swiftlydrew back, and came sideways smiting the sea.
But soon, as ifsatisfied that his work for that time was done, he pushed his pleatedforehead through the ocean, and trailing after him the intertangledlines, continued his leeward way at a traveller's methodic pace.
As before, the attentive ship having descried the whole fight, againcame bearing down to the rescue, and dropping a boat, picked up thefloating mariners, tubs, oars, and whatever else could be caught at,and safely landed them on her decks.
Some sprained shoulders,wrists, and ankles; livid contusions; wrenched harpoons and lances;inextricable intricacies of rope; shattered oars and planks; allthese were there; but no fatal or even serious ill seemed to havebefallen any one.
As with Fedallah the day before, so Ahab was nowfound grimly clinging to his boat's broken half, which afforded acomparatively easy float; nor did it so exhaust him as the previousday's mishap.
But when he was helped to the deck, all eyes were fastened upon him;as instead of standing by himself he still half-hung upon theshoulder of Starbuck, who had thus far been the foremost to assisthim.
His ivory leg had been snapped off, leaving but one short sharpsplinter.
"Aye, aye, Starbuck, 'tis sweet to lean sometimes, be the leaner whohe will; and would old Ahab had leaned oftener than he has.
""The ferrule has not stood, sir," said the carpenter, now coming up;"I put good work into that leg.
""But no bones broken, sir, I hope," said Stubb with true concern.
"Aye! and all splintered to pieces, Stubb!--d'ye see it.
--But evenwith a broken bone, old Ahab is untouched; and I account no livingbone of mine one jot more me, than this dead one that's lost.
Norwhite whale, nor man, nor fiend, can so much as graze old Ahab in hisown proper and inaccessible being.
Can any lead touch yonder floor,any mast scrape yonder roof?--Aloft there! which way?""Dead to leeward, sir.
""Up helm, then; pile on the sail again, ship keepers! down the restof the spare boats and rig them--Mr.
Starbuck away, and muster theboat's crews.
""Let me first help thee towards the bulwarks, sir.
""Oh, oh, oh! how this splinter gores me now! Accursed fate! that theunconquerable captain in the soul should have such a craven mate!""Sir?""My body, man, not thee.
Give me something for a cane--there, thatshivered lance will do.
Muster the men.
Surely I have not seen himyet.
By heaven it cannot be!--missing?--quick! call them all.
"The old man's hinted thought was true.
Upon mustering the company,the Parsee was not there.
"The Parsee!" cried Stubb--"he must have been caught in--""The black vomit wrench thee!--run all of ye above, alow, cabin,forecastle--find him--not gone--not gone!"But quickly they returned to him with the tidings that the Parsee wasnowhere to be found.
"Aye, sir," said Stubb--"caught among the tangles of your line--Ithought I saw him dragging under.
""MY line! MY line? Gone?--gone? What means that little word?--Whatdeath-knell rings in it, that old Ahab shakes as if he were thebelfry.
The harpoon, too!--toss over the litter there,--d'ye seeit?--the forged iron, men, the white whale's--no, no, no,--blisteredfool! this hand did dart it!--'tis in the fish!--Aloft there! Keephim nailed--Quick!--all hands to the rigging of the boats--collectthe oars--harpooneers! the irons, the irons!--hoist the royals higher--apull on all the sheets!--helm there! steady, steady for your life!I'll ten times girdle the unmeasured globe; yea and dive straightthrough it, but I'll slay him yet!"Great God! but for one single instant show thyself," cried Starbuck;"never, never wilt thou capture him, old man--In Jesus' name no moreof this, that's worse than devil's madness.
Two days chased; twicestove to splinters; thy very leg once more snatched from under thee;thy evil shadow gone--all good angels mobbing thee with warnings:--what more wouldst thou have?--Shall we keep chasing this murderousfish till he swamps the last man? Shall we be dragged by him to thebottom of the sea? Shall we be towed by him to the infernal world?Oh, oh,--Impiety and blasphemy to hunt him more!""Starbuck, of late I've felt strangely moved to thee; ever since thathour we both saw--thou know'st what, in one another's eyes.
But inthis matter of the whale, be the front of thy face to me as the palmof this hand--a lipless, unfeatured blank.
Ahab is for ever Ahab,man.
This whole act's immutably decreed.
'Twas rehearsed by theeand me a billion years before this ocean rolled.
Fool! I am theFates' lieutenant; I act under orders.
Look thou, underling! thatthou obeyest mine.
--Stand round me, men.
Ye see an old man cut downto the stump; leaning on a shivered lance; propped up on a lonelyfoot.
'Tis Ahab--his body's part; but Ahab's soul's a centipede,that moves upon a hundred legs.
I feel strained, half stranded, asropes that tow dismasted frigates in a gale; and I may look so.
Butere I break, yell hear me crack; and till ye hear THAT, know thatAhab's hawser tows his purpose yet.
Believe ye, men, in the thingscalled omens? Then laugh aloud, and cry encore! For ere they drown,drowning things will twice rise to the surface; then rise again, tosink for evermore.
So with Moby Dick--two days he's floated--tomorrowwill be the third.
Aye, men, he'll rise once more,--but only tospout his last! D'ye feel brave men, brave?""As fearless fire," cried Stubb.
"And as mechanical," muttered Ahab.
Then as the men went forward, hemuttered on: "The things called omens! And yesterday I talked thesame to Starbuck there, concerning my broken boat.
Oh! how valiantlyI seek to drive out of others' hearts what's clinched so fast inmine!--The Parsee--the Parsee!--gone, gone? and he was to gobefore:--but still was to be seen again ere I could perish--How'sthat?--There's a riddle now might baffle all the lawyers backed bythe ghosts of the whole line of judges:--like a hawk's beak it pecksmy brain.
I'LL, I'LL solve it, though!"When dusk descended, the whale was still in sight to leeward.
So once more the sail was shortened, and everything passed nearly ason the previous night; only, the sound of hammers, and the hum of thegrindstone was heard till nearly daylight, as the men toiled bylanterns in the complete and careful rigging of the spare boats andsharpening their fresh weapons for the morrow.
Meantime, of thebroken keel of Ahab's wrecked craft the carpenter made him anotherleg; while still as on the night before, slouched Ahab stood fixedwithin his scuttle; his hid, heliotrope glance anticipatingly gonebackward on its dial; sat due eastward for the earliest sun.
The Chase.
--Third Day.
The morning of the third day dawned fair and fresh, and once more thesolitary night-man at the fore-mast-head was relieved by crowds ofthe daylight look-outs, who dotted every mast and almost every spar.
"D'ye see him?" cried Ahab; but the whale was not yet in sight.
"In his infallible wake, though; but follow that wake, that's all.
Helm there; steady, as thou goest, and hast been going.
What alovely day again! were it a new-made world, and made for asummer-house to the angels, and this morning the first of itsthrowing open to them, a fairer day could not dawn upon that world.
Here's food for thought, had Ahab time to think; but Ahab neverthinks; he only feels, feels, feels; THAT'S tingling enough formortal man! to think's audacity.
God only has that right andprivilege.
Thinking is, or ought to be, a coolness and a calmness;and our poor hearts throb, and our poor brains beat too much forthat.
And yet, I've sometimes thought my brain was very calm--frozencalm, this old skull cracks so, like a glass in which the contentsturned to ice, and shiver it.
And still this hair is growing now;this moment growing, and heat must breed it; but no, it's like thatsort of common grass that will grow anywhere, between the earthyclefts of Greenland ice or in Vesuvius lava.
How the wild winds blowit; they whip it about me as the torn shreds of split sails lash thetossed ship they cling to.
A vile wind that has no doubt blown erethis through prison corridors and cells, and wards of hospitals, andventilated them, and now comes blowing hither as innocent as fleeces.
Out upon it!--it's tainted.
Were I the wind, I'd blow no more onsuch a wicked, miserable world.
I'd crawl somewhere to a cave, andslink there.
And yet, 'tis a noble and heroic thing, the wind! whoever conquered it? In every fight it has the last and bitterestblow.
Run tilting at it, and you but run through it.
Ha! a cowardwind that strikes stark naked men, but will not stand to receive asingle blow.
Even Ahab is a braver thing--a nobler thing than THAT.
Would now the wind but had a body; but all the things that mostexasperate and outrage mortal man, all these things are bodiless, butonly bodiless as objects, not as agents.
There's a most special, amost cunning, oh, a most malicious difference! And yet, I say again,and swear it now, that there's something all glorious and gracious inthe wind.
These warm Trade Winds, at least, that in the clearheavens blow straight on, in strong and steadfast, vigorous mildness;and veer not from their mark, however the baser currents of the seamay turn and tack, and mightiest Mississippies of the land swift andswerve about, uncertain where to go at last.
And by the eternalPoles! these same Trades that so directly blow my good ship on; theseTrades, or something like them--something so unchangeable, and fullas strong, blow my keeled soul along! To it! Aloft there! Whatd'ye see?""Nothing, sir.
""Nothing! and noon at hand! The doubloon goes a-begging! See thesun! Aye, aye, it must be so.
I've oversailed him.
How, got thestart? Aye, he's chasing ME now; not I, HIM--that's bad; I mighthave known it, too.
Fool! the lines--the harpoons he's towing.
Aye,aye, I have run him by last night.
About! about! Come down, all ofye, but the regular look outs! Man the braces!"Steering as she had done, the wind had been somewhat on the Pequod'squarter, so that now being pointed in the reverse direction, thebraced ship sailed hard upon the breeze as she rechurned the cream inher own white wake.
"Against the wind he now steers for the open jaw," murmured Starbuckto himself, as he coiled the new-hauled main-brace upon the rail.
"God keep us, but already my bones feel damp within me, and from theinside wet my flesh.
I misdoubt me that I disobey my God in obeyinghim!""Stand by to sway me up!" cried Ahab, advancing to the hempen basket.
"We should meet him soon.
""Aye, aye, sir," and straightway Starbuck did Ahab's bidding, andonce more Ahab swung on high.
A whole hour now passed; gold-beaten out to ages.
Time itself nowheld long breaths with keen suspense.
But at last, some three pointsoff the weather bow, Ahab descried the spout again, and instantlyfrom the three mast-heads three shrieks went up as if the tongues offire had voiced it.
"Forehead to forehead I meet thee, this third time, Moby Dick! Ondeck there!--brace sharper up; crowd her into the wind's eye.
He'stoo far off to lower yet, Mr.
Starbuck.
The sails shake! Stand overthat helmsman with a top-maul! So, so; he travels fast, and I mustdown.
But let me have one more good round look aloft here at thesea; there's time for that.
An old, old sight, and yet somehow soyoung; aye, and not changed a wink since I first saw it, a boy, fromthe sand-hills of Nantucket! The same!--the same!--the same to Noahas to me.
There's a soft shower to leeward.
Such lovelyleewardings! They must lead somewhere--to something else than commonland, more palmy than the palms.
Leeward! the white whale goes thatway; look to windward, then; the better if the bitterer quarter.
Butgood bye, good bye, old mast-head! What's this?--green? aye, tinymosses in these warped cracks.
No such green weather stains onAhab's head! There's the difference now between man's old age andmatter's.
But aye, old mast, we both grow old together; sound in ourhulls, though, are we not, my ship? Aye, minus a leg, that's all.
By heaven this dead wood has the better of my live flesh every way.
I can't compare with it; and I've known some ships made of dead treesoutlast the lives of men made of the most vital stuff of vitalfathers.
What's that he said? he should still go before me, mypilot; and yet to be seen again? But where? Will I have eyes at thebottom of the sea, supposing I descend those endless stairs? and allnight I've been sailing from him, wherever he did sink to.
Aye, aye,like many more thou told'st direful truth as touching thyself, OParsee; but, Ahab, there thy shot fell short.
Good-bye,mast-head--keep a good eye upon the whale, the while I'm gone.
We'lltalk to-morrow, nay, to-night, when the white whale lies down there,tied by head and tail.
"He gave the word; and still gazing round him, was steadily loweredthrough the cloven blue air to the deck.
In due time the boats were lowered; but as standing in his shallop'sstern, Ahab just hovered upon the point of the descent, he waved tothe mate,--who held one of the tackle-ropes on deck--and bade himpause.
"Starbuck!""Sir?""For the third time my soul's ship starts upon this voyage,Starbuck.
""Aye, sir, thou wilt have it so.
""Some ships sail from their ports, and ever afterwards are missing,Starbuck!""Truth, sir: saddest truth.
""Some men die at ebb tide; some at low water; some at the full of theflood;--and I feel now like a billow that's all one crested comb,Starbuck.
I am old;--shake hands with me, man.
"Their hands met; their eyes fastened; Starbuck's tears the glue.
"Oh, my captain, my captain!--noble heart--go not--go not!--see, it'sa brave man that weeps; how great the agony of the persuasion then!""Lower away!"--cried Ahab, tossing the mate's arm from him.
"Standby the crew!"In an instant the boat was pulling round close under the stern.
"The sharks! the sharks!" cried a voice from the low cabin-windowthere; "O master, my master, come back!"But Ahab heard nothing; for his own voice was high-lifted then; andthe boat leaped on.
Yet the voice spake true; for scarce had he pushed from the ship,when numbers of sharks, seemingly rising from out the dark watersbeneath the hull, maliciously snapped at the blades of the oars,every time they dipped in the water; and in this way accompanied theboat with their bites.
It is a thing not uncommonly happening to thewhale-boats in those swarming seas; the sharks at times apparentlyfollowing them in the same prescient way that vultures hover over thebanners of marching regiments in the east.
But these were the firstsharks that had been observed by the Pequod since the White Whale hadbeen first descried; and whether it was that Ahab's crew were allsuch tiger-yellow barbarians, and therefore their flesh more musky tothe senses of the sharks--a matter sometimes well known to affectthem,--however it was, they seemed to follow that one boat withoutmolesting the others.
"Heart of wrought steel!" murmured Starbuck gazing over the side, andfollowing with his eyes the receding boat--"canst thou yet ringboldly to that sight?--lowering thy keel among ravening sharks, andfollowed by them, open-mouthed to the chase; and this the criticalthird day?--For when three days flow together in one continuousintense pursuit; be sure the first is the morning, the second thenoon, and the third the evening and the end of that thing--be thatend what it may.
Oh! my God! what is this that shoots through me,and leaves me so deadly calm, yet expectant,--fixed at the top of ashudder! Future things swim before me, as in empty outlines andskeletons; all the past is somehow grown dim.
Mary, girl! thoufadest in pale glories behind me; boy! I seem to see but thy eyesgrown wondrous blue.
Strangest problems of life seem clearing; butclouds sweep between--Is my journey's end coming? My legs feelfaint; like his who has footed it all day.
Feel thy heart,--beatsit yet? Stir thyself, Starbuck!--stave it off--move, move! speakaloud!--Mast-head there! See ye my boy's hand on thehill?--Crazed;--aloft there!--keep thy keenest eye upon the boats:--mark well the whale!--Ho! again!--drive off that hawk! see! hepecks--he tears the vane"--pointing to the red flag flying at themain-truck--"Ha! he soars away with it!--Where's the old man now?see'st thou that sight, oh Ahab!--shudder, shudder!"The boats had not gone very far, when by a signal from themast-heads--a downward pointed arm, Ahab knew that the whale hadsounded; but intending to be near him at the next rising, he held onhis way a little sideways from the vessel; the becharmed crewmaintaining the profoundest silence, as the head-beat waves hammeredand hammered against the opposing bow.
"Drive, drive in your nails, oh ye waves! to their uttermost headsdrive them in! ye but strike a thing without a lid; and no coffin andno hearse can be mine:--and hemp only can kill me! Ha! ha!"Suddenly the waters around them slowly swelled in broad circles; thenquickly upheaved, as if sideways sliding from a submerged berg ofice, swiftly rising to the surface.
A low rumbling sound was heard;a subterraneous hum; and then all held their breaths; as bedraggledwith trailing ropes, and harpoons, and lances, a vast form shotlengthwise, but obliquely from the sea.
Shrouded in a thin droopingveil of mist, it hovered for a moment in the rainbowed air; and thenfell swamping back into the deep.
Crushed thirty feet upwards, thewaters flashed for an instant like heaps of fountains, then brokenlysank in a shower of flakes, leaving the circling surface creamed likenew milk round the marble trunk of the whale.
"Give way!" cried Ahab to the oarsmen, and the boats darted forwardto the attack; but maddened by yesterday's fresh irons that corrodedin him, Moby Dick seemed combinedly possessed by all the angels thatfell from heaven.
The wide tiers of welded tendons overspreading hisbroad white forehead, beneath the transparent skin, looked knittedtogether; as head on, he came churning his tail among the boats; andonce more flailed them apart; spilling out the irons and lances fromthe two mates' boats, and dashing in one side of the upper part oftheir bows, but leaving Ahab's almost without a scar.
While Daggoo and Queequeg were stopping the strained planks; and asthe whale swimming out from them, turned, and showed one entire flankas he shot by them again; at that moment a quick cry went up.
Lashedround and round to the fish's back; pinioned in the turns upon turnsin which, during the past night, the whale had reeled the involutionsof the lines around him, the half torn body of the Parsee was seen;his sable raiment frayed to shreds; his distended eyes turned fullupon old Ahab.
The harpoon dropped from his hand.
"Befooled, befooled!"--drawing in a long lean breath--"Aye, Parsee!I see thee again.
--Aye, and thou goest before; and this, THIS then isthe hearse that thou didst promise.
But I hold thee to the lastletter of thy word.
Where is the second hearse? Away, mates, to theship! those boats are useless now; repair them if ye can in time, andreturn to me; if not, Ahab is enough to die--Down, men! the firstthing that but offers to jump from this boat I stand in, that thing Iharpoon.
Ye are not other men, but my arms and my legs; and so obeyme.
--Where's the whale? gone down again?"But he looked too nigh the boat; for as if bent upon escaping withthe corpse he bore, and as if the particular place of the lastencounter had been but a stage in his leeward voyage, Moby Dick wasnow again steadily swimming forward; and had almost passed theship,--which thus far had been sailing in the contrary direction tohim, though for the present her headway had been stopped.
He seemedswimming with his utmost velocity, and now only intent upon pursuinghis own straight path in the sea.
"Oh! Ahab," cried Starbuck, "not too late is it, even now, the thirdday, to desist.
See! Moby Dick seeks thee not.
It is thou, thou,that madly seekest him!"Setting sail to the rising wind, the lonely boat was swiftly impelledto leeward, by both oars and canvas.
And at last when Ahab wassliding by the vessel, so near as plainly to distinguish Starbuck'sface as he leaned over the rail, he hailed him to turn the vesselabout, and follow him, not too swiftly, at a judicious interval.
Glancing upwards, he saw Tashtego, Queequeg, and Daggoo, eagerlymounting to the three mast-heads; while the oarsmen were rocking inthe two staved boats which had but just been hoisted to the side, andwere busily at work in repairing them.
One after the other, throughthe port-holes, as he sped, he also caught flying glimpses of Stubband Flask, busying themselves on deck among bundles of new irons andlances.
As he saw all this; as he heard the hammers in the brokenboats; far other hammers seemed driving a nail into his heart.
Buthe rallied.
And now marking that the vane or flag was gone from themain-mast-head, he shouted to Tashtego, who had just gained thatperch, to descend again for another flag, and a hammer and nails, andso nail it to the mast.
Whether fagged by the three days' running chase, and the resistanceto his swimming in the knotted hamper he bore; or whether it was somelatent deceitfulness and malice in him: whichever was true, the WhiteWhale's way now began to abate, as it seemed, from the boat sorapidly nearing him once more; though indeed the whale's last starthad not been so long a one as before.
And still as Ahab glided overthe waves the unpitying sharks accompanied him; and so pertinaciouslystuck to the boat; and so continually bit at the plying oars, thatthe blades became jagged and crunched, and left small splinters inthe sea, at almost every dip.
"Heed them not! those teeth but give new rowlocks to your oars.
Pullon! 'tis the better rest, the shark's jaw than the yielding water.
""But at every bite, sir, the thin blades grow smaller and smaller!""They will last long enough! pull on!--But who can tell"--hemuttered--"whether these sharks swim to feast on the whale or onAhab?--But pull on! Aye, all alive, now--we near him.
The helm!take the helm! let me pass,"--and so saying two of the oarsmen helpedhim forward to the bows of the still flying boat.
At length as the craft was cast to one side, and ran ranging alongwith the White Whale's flank, he seemed strangely oblivious of itsadvance--as the whale sometimes will--and Ahab was fairly within thesmoky mountain mist, which, thrown off from the whale's spout, curledround his great, Monadnock hump; he was even thus close to him; when,with body arched back, and both arms lengthwise high-lifted to thepoise, he darted his fierce iron, and his far fiercer curse into thehated whale.
As both steel and curse sank to the socket, as ifsucked into a morass, Moby Dick sideways writhed; spasmodicallyrolled his nigh flank against the bow, and, without staving a hole init, so suddenly canted the boat over, that had it not been for theelevated part of the gunwale to which he then clung, Ahab would oncemore have been tossed into the sea.
As it was, three of theoarsmen--who foreknew not the precise instant of the dart, and weretherefore unprepared for its effects--these were flung out; but sofell, that, in an instant two of them clutched the gunwale again, andrising to its level on a combing wave, hurled themselves bodilyinboard again; the third man helplessly dropping astern, but stillafloat and swimming.
Almost simultaneously, with a mighty volition of ungraduated,instantaneous swiftness, the White Whale darted through the welteringsea.
But when Ahab cried out to the steersman to take new turns withthe line, and hold it so; and commanded the crew to turn round ontheir seats, and tow the boat up to the mark; the moment thetreacherous line felt that double strain and tug, it snapped in theempty air!"What breaks in me? Some sinew cracks!--'tis whole again; oars!oars! Burst in upon him!"Hearing the tremendous rush of the sea-crashing boat, the whalewheeled round to present his blank forehead at bay; but in thatevolution, catching sight of the nearing black hull of the ship;seemingly seeing in it the source of all his persecutions; bethinkingit--it may be--a larger and nobler foe; of a sudden, he bore downupon its advancing prow, smiting his jaws amid fiery showers of foam.
Ahab staggered; his hand smote his forehead.
"I grow blind; hands!stretch out before me that I may yet grope my way.
Is't night?""The whale! The ship!" cried the cringing oarsmen.
"Oars! oars! Slope downwards to thy depths, O sea, that ere it befor ever too late, Ahab may slide this last, last time upon hismark! I see: the ship! the ship! Dash on, my men! Will ye notsave my ship?"But as the oarsmen violently forced their boat through thesledge-hammering seas, the before whale-smitten bow-ends of twoplanks burst through, and in an instant almost, the temporarilydisabled boat lay nearly level with the waves; its half-wading,splashing crew, trying hard to stop the gap and bale out the pouringwater.
Meantime, for that one beholding instant, Tashtego's mast-head hammerremained suspended in his hand; and the red flag, half-wrapping himas with a plaid, then streamed itself straight out from him, as hisown forward-flowing heart; while Starbuck and Stubb, standing uponthe bowsprit beneath, caught sight of the down-coming monster just assoon as he.
"The whale, the whale! Up helm, up helm! Oh, all ye sweet powers ofair, now hug me close! Let not Starbuck die, if die he must, in awoman's fainting fit.
Up helm, I say--ye fools, the jaw! the jaw!Is this the end of all my bursting prayers? all my life-longfidelities? Oh, Ahab, Ahab, lo, thy work.
Steady! helmsman, steady.
Nay, nay! Up helm again! He turns to meet us! Oh, hisunappeasable brow drives on towards one, whose duty tells him hecannot depart.
My God, stand by me now!""Stand not by me, but stand under me, whoever you are that will nowhelp Stubb; for Stubb, too, sticks here.
I grin at thee, thougrinning whale! Who ever helped Stubb, or kept Stubb awake, butStubb's own unwinking eye? And now poor Stubb goes to bed upon amattrass that is all too soft; would it were stuffed with brushwood!I grin at thee, thou grinning whale! Look ye, sun, moon, and stars!I call ye assassins of as good a fellow as ever spouted up his ghost.
For all that, I would yet ring glasses with ye, would ye but handthe cup! Oh, oh! oh, oh! thou grinning whale, but there'll be plentyof gulping soon! Why fly ye not, O Ahab! For me, off shoes andjacket to it; let Stubb die in his drawers! A most mouldy and oversalted death, though;--cherries! cherries! cherries! Oh, Flask, forone red cherry ere we die!""Cherries? I only wish that we were where they grow.
Oh, Stubb, Ihope my poor mother's drawn my part-pay ere this; if not, few copperswill now come to her, for the voyage is up.
"From the ship's bows, nearly all the seamen now hung inactive;hammers, bits of plank, lances, and harpoons, mechanically retainedin their hands, just as they had darted from their variousemployments; all their enchanted eyes intent upon the whale, whichfrom side to side strangely vibrating his predestinating head, sent abroad band of overspreading semicircular foam before him as herushed.
Retribution, swift vengeance, eternal malice were in hiswhole aspect, and spite of all that mortal man could do, the solidwhite buttress of his forehead smote the ship's starboard bow, tillmen and timbers reeled.
Some fell flat upon their faces.
Likedislodged trucks, the heads of the harpooneers aloft shook on theirbull-like necks.
Through the breach, they heard the waters pour, asmountain torrents down a flume.
"The ship! The hearse!--the second hearse!" cried Ahab from theboat; "its wood could only be American!"Diving beneath the settling ship, the whale ran quivering along itskeel; but turning under water, swiftly shot to the surface again, faroff the other bow, but within a few yards of Ahab's boat, where, fora time, he lay quiescent.
"I turn my body from the sun.
What ho, Tashtego! let me hear thyhammer.
Oh! ye three unsurrendered spires of mine; thou uncrackedkeel; and only god-bullied hull; thou firm deck, and haughty helm,and Pole-pointed prow,--death-glorious ship! must ye then perish,and without me? Am I cut off from the last fond pride of meanestshipwrecked captains? Oh, lonely death on lonely life! Oh, now Ifeel my topmost greatness lies in my topmost grief.
Ho, ho! from allyour furthest bounds, pour ye now in, ye bold billows of my wholeforegone life, and top this one piled comber of my death! Towardsthee I roll, thou all-destroying but unconquering whale; to the lastI grapple with thee; from hell's heart I stab at thee; for hate'ssake I spit my last breath at thee.
Sink all coffins and all hearsesto one common pool! and since neither can be mine, let me then tow topieces, while still chasing thee, though tied to thee, thou damnedwhale! THUS, I give up the spear!"The harpoon was darted; the stricken whale flew forward; withigniting velocity the line ran through the grooves;--ran foul.
Ahabstooped to clear it; he did clear it; but the flying turn caught himround the neck, and voicelessly as Turkish mutes bowstring theirvictim, he was shot out of the boat, ere the crew knew he was gone.
Next instant, the heavy eye-splice in the rope's final end flew outof the stark-empty tub, knocked down an oarsman, and smiting the sea,disappeared in its depths.
For an instant, the tranced boat's crew stood still; then turned.
"The ship? Great God, where is the ship?" Soon they through dim,bewildering mediums saw her sidelong fading phantom, as in thegaseous Fata Morgana; only the uppermost masts out of water; whilefixed by infatuation, or fidelity, or fate, to their once loftyperches, the pagan harpooneers still maintained their sinkinglookouts on the sea.
And now, concentric circles seized the loneboat itself, and all its crew, and each floating oar, and everylance-pole, and spinning, animate and inanimate, all round and roundin one vortex, carried the smallest chip of the Pequod out of sight.
But as the last whelmings intermixingly poured themselves over thesunken head of the Indian at the mainmast, leaving a few inches ofthe erect spar yet visible, together with long streaming yards of theflag, which calmly undulated, with ironical coincidings, over thedestroying billows they almost touched;--at that instant, a red armand a hammer hovered backwardly uplifted in the open air, in the actof nailing the flag faster and yet faster to the subsiding spar.
Asky-hawk that tauntingly had followed the main-truck downwards fromits natural home among the stars, pecking at the flag, andincommoding Tashtego there; this bird now chanced to intercept itsbroad fluttering wing between the hammer and the wood; andsimultaneously feeling that etherial thrill, the submerged savagebeneath, in his death-gasp, kept his hammer frozen there; and so thebird of heaven, with archangelic shrieks, and his imperial beakthrust upwards, and his whole captive form folded in the flag ofAhab, went down with his ship, which, like Satan, would not sink tohell till she had dragged a living part of heaven along with her, andhelmeted herself with it.
Now small fowls flew screaming over the yet yawning gulf; a sullenwhite surf beat against its steep sides; then all collapsed, and thegreat shroud of the sea rolled on as it rolled five thousand yearsago.
"AND I ONLY AM ESCAPED ALONE TO TELL THEE"Job.
The drama's done.
Why then here does any one step forth?--Becauseone did survive the wreck.
It so chanced, that after the Parsee's disappearance, I was he whomthe Fates ordained to take the place of Ahab's bowsman, when thatbowsman assumed the vacant post; the same, who, when on the last daythe three men were tossed from out of the rocking boat, was droppedastern.
So, floating on the margin of the ensuing scene, and in fullsight of it, when the halfspent suction of the sunk ship reached me,I was then, but slowly, drawn towards the closing vortex.
When Ireached it, it had subsided to a creamy pool.
Round and round, then,and ever contracting towards the button-like black bubble at the axisof that slowly wheeling circle, like another Ixion I did revolve.
Till, gaining that vital centre, the black bubble upward burst; andnow, liberated by reason of its cunning spring, and, owing to itsgreat buoyancy, rising with great force, the coffin life-buoy shotlengthwise from the sea, fell over, and floated by my side.
Buoyedup by that coffin, for almost one whole day and night, I floated on asoft and dirgelike main.
The unharming sharks, they glided by as ifwith padlocks on their mouths; the savage sea-hawks sailed withsheathed beaks.
On the second day, a sail drew near, nearer, andpicked me up at last.
It was the devious-cruising Rachel, that inher retracing search after her missing children, only found anotherorphan.
